# unfoldingWord Simplified

## License Information

**unfoldingWord Simplified** is based on and adapted from: _unfoldingWord® Simplified Text_, [unfoldingWord](https://unfoldingword.org/), 2022, which is licensed under a [CC BY-SA 4.0 license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode.en).

This markdown version is provided under the same license.



--------------------------------

## John 1:1 (id: 1043001001)

1The Word existed before the universe existed. The Word was with God. The Word also was God.


## John 1:2 (id: 1043001002)

2He, the Word, was with God before the universe existed.


## John 1:3 (id: 1043001003)

3God made everything through him. God made every single thing in the universe with him.


## John 1:4 (id: 1043001004)

4The Word gives eternal life, and that eternal life is {God’s good and true} light {that he revealed} to humans.


## John 1:5 (id: 1043001005)

5God revealed {his good and true} light to the evil world, and that evil world did not vanquish it.


## John 1:6 (id: 1043001006)

6God sent a man named John {who was known as John the Baptizer}.


## John 1:7 (id: 1043001007)

7He came in order to declare to people about {Jesus, who is} the light. {He declared this} so that everyone might trust in the light by means of his {testimony}.


## John 1:8 (id: 1043001008)

8John himself was not that light, but he came in order to tell people about the light.


## John 1:9 (id: 1043001009)

9That true light was {Jesus,} who revealed God’s truth and goodness to everyone. {He was} that light that was coming into the world.


## John 1:10 (id: 1043001010)

10The Word was in the world, and he created the universe. Nevertheless, the people of the world did not recognize him.


## John 1:11 (id: 1043001011)

11The Word came to his own people, {the Jews,} but they rejected him.


## John 1:12 (id: 1043001012)

12But to everyone who accepted him and trusted in him he gave the right to become God’s children.


## John 1:13 (id: 1043001013)

13These children of God were not spiritually born by means of normal human birth, nor by human desire, nor by the desire of their fathers. Rather, they were spiritually born by God.


## John 1:14 (id: 1043001014)

14The Word became a real human being and temporarily lived here {where we live}. We have seen him display his glorious nature. {That is} the glorious nature of the Unique Son who came from the Father. He fully possesses God’s kind acts and true teachings.


## John 1:15 (id: 1043001015)

15John the Baptizer was telling people about the Word. And he shouted {to those around him}, “I told you that someone would come after me {and that} he is much more important than I am because he existed long before me.”


## John 1:16 (id: 1043001016)

16{We know the Word fully possesses God’s kind acts and true teachings} because all of us have benefited from what he fully possesses, {having benefited from} one kind act after another.


## John 1:17 (id: 1043001017)

17{This is} because God gave his laws {to the Israelites} by Moses. But God’s kind acts and true message came into full existence by Jesus the Messiah.


## John 1:18 (id: 1043001018)

18No one has ever seen God. But Jesus, the Unique One, is God. He is close to God the Father, and he himself has revealed the Father.


## John 1:19 (id: 1043001019)

19This is what John the Baptizer testified when the Jewish leaders sent some priests and Levites from the city of Jerusalem in order to ask him, “Who are you?”


## John 1:20 (id: 1043001020)

20{At that time} John emphatically confessed, “I am not the Messiah!”


## John 1:21 (id: 1043001021)

21Then they asked him, “{If that is so,} then who are you? Are you Elijah?” He said, “No.” They asked again, “Are you the Prophet {whom God said would come}?” John answered, “No.”


## John 1:22 (id: 1043001022)

22So these priests and Levites asked John once more, “Who are you? {Tell us} so that we can report {what you say} to those leaders who sent us. Who do you claim to be?”


## John 1:23 (id: 1043001023)

23John told them, “I am the person shouting in the desolate area to prepare yourselves to receive the Lord when he comes. {I am whom} the prophet Isaiah foretold.”


## John 1:24 (id: 1043001024)

24These priests and Levites whom the leaders in Jerusalem sent to John were Pharisees.


## John 1:25 (id: 1043001025)

25They asked him, “If you are not the Messiah nor Elijah nor the Prophet, then why are you baptizing people?”


## John 1:26 (id: 1043001026)

26John replied, “I am baptizing people with water, but there is someone now among you whom you do not know.


## John 1:27 (id: 1043001027)

27He follows after me, but I am not important enough even to untie his sandals.”


## John 1:28 (id: 1043001028)

28These events occurred at the village of Bethany over {on the east side of} the Jordan River. {That is the place} where John was baptizing people.


## John 1:29 (id: 1043001029)

29The day after that happened, John saw Jesus coming toward him. Then he said to the people, “Look! {He is} the Lamb of God! He will sacrifice himself to forgive the sins of the people in this world.


## John 1:30 (id: 1043001030)

30This man is the one about whom I said, ‘Someone will come after me who is more important than I am, because {he existed long} before me.’


## John 1:31 (id: 1043001031)

31I did not know who he was {at first}. Nevertheless, I have been baptizing people with water for the very purpose of revealing him to the people of Israel.”


## John 1:32 (id: 1043001032)

32And John declared, “I saw God’s Spirit coming down from heaven appearing like a dove. Then the Spirit remained on Jesus.


## John 1:33 (id: 1043001033)

33I did not know who he was {at first}, but God sent me to baptize {people} with water and told me, ‘The man on whom you see my Spirit come down and remain is the man who will baptize with the Holy Spirit.’


## John 1:34 (id: 1043001034)

34I have seen this, and I declare to you that this man, Jesus, is the Son of God.”


## John 1:35 (id: 1043001035)

35The day after that happened, John the Baptizer was again with two of his students.


## John 1:36 (id: 1043001036)

36When he saw Jesus passing by, he said, “Look! {He is} the Lamb of God!”


## John 1:37 (id: 1043001037)

37Then John’s two disciples heard what he said and followed Jesus.


## John 1:38 (id: 1043001038)

38When Jesus turned around and saw them coming behind him, he asked them, “What are you looking for?” They said to him, “Rabbi (which means ‘teacher’ {in Jewish Aramaic}), where are you lodging?”


## John 1:39 (id: 1043001039)

39He replied, “Come with me, and you will see!” So they came and saw where Jesus was lodging. They stayed with him that day because it was getting late. (It was about 4:00 PM)


## John 1:40 (id: 1043001040)

40One of those two disciples who had heard what John had said and followed Jesus was Andrew. {He was} Simon Peter’s brother.


## John 1:41 (id: 1043001041)

41Andrew first {went and} found his brother Simon. {When he came to him,} he said, “We have found the Messiah!” (Messiah is “Christ” in the Greek language.)


## John 1:42 (id: 1043001042)

42Andrew took Simon to Jesus. When Jesus looked at Peter, he said, “You are Simon. Your father’s name is John. {From now on} your name will {also} be Cephas.” ({Cephas is an Aramaic word that is} “Peter” in Greek {and means “rock”}.)


## John 1:43 (id: 1043001043)

43The day after that happened Jesus decided to leave that area. He went to the region of Galilee and found a man named Philip. Jesus said to him, “Come be my disciple.”


## John 1:44 (id: 1043001044)

44Philip was from the city of Bethsaida {in Galilee}. {This is also the city that} Andrew and Peter were from.


## John 1:45 (id: 1043001045)

45{Then} Philip {went and} found Nathaniel. {When he came to him,} he said, “We have found the Messiah whom Moses wrote about in the law {God gave the Israelites} and {whom} the prophets {said would come}. {The Messiah is} Jesus. His father’s name is Joseph. He is from the town of Nazareth.”


## John 1:46 (id: 1043001046)

46Nathaniel replied, “From Nazareth? Certainly nothing good can come out of that town!” Philip replied, “Come and see for yourself!”


## John 1:47 (id: 1043001047)

47When Jesus saw Nathaniel approaching him, he said to him, “Look! {Here is} an honest Israelite! He never deceives anyone!”


## John 1:48 (id: 1043001048)

48Nathaniel asked him, “How do you know what kind of man I am?” Jesus replied, “I saw you before Philip called you, when you were sitting {by yourself} under the fig tree.”


## John 1:49 (id: 1043001049)

49Then Nathaniel declared, “Teacher, you must be the Son of God! You are the King of Israel {whom we have been waiting for}!”


## John 1:50 (id: 1043001050)

50Jesus replied, “Do you trust in me just because I told you that I saw you under the fig tree? You will see me do things that are much greater than that!”


## John 1:51 (id: 1043001051)

51Then Jesus said to him, “I am telling you the truth: {Just like the vision your ancestor Jacob long ago saw,} you will see heaven opened up, and you will see God’s angels going up and coming down on me, the Son of Man.”


## John 2:1 (id: 1043002001)

1Two days later, there was a wedding in Cana, which is a town in the region of Galilee, and Jesus’ mother was there.


## John 2:2 (id: 1043002002)

2And someone also invited Jesus and his disciples to the wedding.


## John 2:3 (id: 1043002003)

3{The hosts served wine to those attending the wedding and} they drank all the wine they had. {So} Jesus’ mother said to him, “They are out of wine. {Please do something about it.}”


## John 2:4 (id: 1043002004)

4Then Jesus said to her, “Madam, what does that have to do with me or you? {The chosen} time {for me to begin} my {work} has not arrived yet.”


## John 2:5 (id: 1043002005)

5Jesus’ mother told the servants, “Do whatever he tells you to do.”


## John 2:6 (id: 1043002006)

6(There were six {empty} stone jars placed there. They held water {so that the people could wash themselves according to} Jewish religious cleansing laws. Each jar could hold 80 to 120 liters {of water}.)


## John 2:7 (id: 1043002007)

7Jesus told the servants, “Fill the jars with water.” So they filled the jars completely to the top.


## John 2:8 (id: 1043002008)

8Then he told them, “Now, take some water out of a jar and bring it to the director of the wedding feast.” So the servants did that.


## John 2:9 (id: 1043002009)

9Then the director of the feast tasted the water, which had now become wine. (He did not know where the wine had come from, although the servants who had taken out the water knew.) And he called the bridegroom {to himself}.


## John 2:10 (id: 1043002010)

10Then he told the bridegroom, “Everyone serves the best wine first and serves the cheap wine later, when the guests have drunk a lot {and can’t tell the difference}. However, you have saved the best wine until now.”


## John 2:11 (id: 1043002011)

11That was the first of the miraculous signs that Jesus did. He did it in the town of Cana, which is in the region of Galilee. There he showed how great he is. So his disciples trusted in him.


## John 2:12 (id: 1043002012)

12Some time after doing this miracle, Jesus and his mother and brothers, along with his disciples, went down to the town of Capernaum. And they stayed there for a few days.


## John 2:13 (id: 1043002013)

13Now it was almost time for the Jewish Passover celebration, so Jesus went up to the city of Jerusalem.


## John 2:14 (id: 1043002014)

14There in the temple {courtyard} he saw men selling cattle, sheep, and pigeons {for those making sacrifices there}. {He also saw} men sitting at tables, exchanging money {for temple money}.


## John 2:15 (id: 1043002015)

15So Jesus made a whip from some braided leather strips, and he used it to drive all those people out from the temple {along with} the sheep and the cattle. He also scattered the coins of the moneychangers on the ground and flipped their tables over.


## John 2:16 (id: 1043002016)

16He told those who were selling pigeons, “Take these pigeons out of here! Do not turn my Father’s house into a marketplace!”


## John 2:17 (id: 1043002017)

17{This event} reminded his disciples about what someone had written {in the scriptures long before}, “I love your temple so much, {O God,} that I would die for it.”


## John 2:18 (id: 1043002018)

18The Jewish leaders then responded by asking Jesus, “What miracle can you do for us {to prove that you have authority from God} to do these things that you are doing?”


## John 2:19 (id: 1043002019)

19Jesus replied to them, “If you destroy this temple, then in three days I will rebuild it.”


## John 2:20 (id: 1043002020)

20So the Jewish leaders said, “It took 46 years to build this temple. {Are you saying that} you are going to rebuild this entire temple in just three days?”


## John 2:21 (id: 1043002021)

21However, the temple Jesus was speaking about was his own body, {not the temple building}.


## John 2:22 (id: 1043002022)

22As a result {of this statement}, his disciples remembered these things that he had said after God had raised Jesus from the dead. Then they believed both what the scriptures said and what Jesus himself had said.


## John 2:23 (id: 1043002023)

23At a later time, when Jesus was in Jerusalem at the Passover celebration, during {the days of} the celebration, many people trusted in him because they saw the miracles he kept on doing.


## John 2:24 (id: 1043002024)

24Nevertheless, because Jesus knew what all people were like, he did not trust them.


## John 2:25 (id: 1043002025)

25Jesus {also did not trust them} because he did not need anyone to tell him about mankind. {This is} because he knew what people {think and want}.


## John 3:1 (id: 1043003001)

1Now there was a man named Nicodemus. He was a member of {a strict Jewish religious group called} the Pharisees. He was a member of the highest Jewish governing council.


## John 3:2 (id: 1043003002)

2He visited Jesus at night. He said to Jesus, “Teacher, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God. {We know this} because no one can do these miracles you are doing unless God is helping him.”


## John 3:3 (id: 1043003003)

3Jesus replied to Nicodemus and said, “I am telling you the truth: No one can enter where God rules without being born a second time.”


## John 3:4 (id: 1043003004)

4Then Nicodemus said to him, “How can a person be born again when he is old? No one can enter his mother’s womb and be born a second time!”


## John 3:5 (id: 1043003005)

5Jesus answered, “I am telling you the truth: no one can enter where God rules unless he is born again by water and the Spirit.


## John 3:6 (id: 1043003006)

6If a human being gives birth to a person, {that person} is a human being. But those who are born {again} by the {work of God’s} Spirit have a new spiritual nature {that God makes within them}.


## John 3:7 (id: 1043003007)

7Do not be astonished because I told you that you must be born again.


## John 3:8 (id: 1043003008)

8The Holy Spirit is like the wind that blows wherever it wants to blow. Although you can hear the sound of the wind, you do not know where the wind came from or where it is going. {Just as you do not understand these things,} so {also you do not understand} everyone who is born {again} by the {work of God’s} Spirit.”


## John 3:9 (id: 1043003009)

9Nicodemus answered him, “How is this possible?”


## John 3:10 (id: 1043003010)

10Jesus answered him, “You are an important religious teacher among the people of Israel, so you should understand what I am saying!


## John 3:11 (id: 1043003011)

11I am telling you the truth: my disciples and I say the things that we know are true, and we are telling you the things that we have witnessed. Yet you people {to whom we say these things} reject what we are saying.


## John 3:12 (id: 1043003012)

12Since you people do not trust what I say when I tell you about things that happen on this earth, you certainly will not trust what I say when I tell you about things that happen in heaven!


## John 3:13 (id: 1043003013)

13I, the Son of Man, am the only one who has gone up to heaven, and I am the only one who has come down {to earth} from heaven.


## John 3:14 (id: 1043003014)

14{Long ago, when the Israelites were wandering} in the wilderness, Moses lifted up a {bronze model of a poisonous} snake {on a pole, and all who looked up at it were saved from the snakes}. In the same way, people must lift me, the Son of Man, up {on a cross}.


## John 3:15 (id: 1043003015)

15{They will lift me up} so that whoever looks up and trusts in me will live forever {with me in heaven}.


## John 3:16 (id: 1043003016)

16{This is} because God loved the world’s people in this way, so that he gave his Unique Son in order that anyone who trusts in his Son would not die but would live forever.


## John 3:17 (id: 1043003017)

17{This is true} because God did not send me, his Son, into the world in order to declare the world’s people guilty. Rather, {God sent me} in order to save the world’s people by me.


## John 3:18 (id: 1043003018)

18God does not declare guilty anyone who trusts in his Son. But God has already declared guilty everyone who does not trust in his Son, because they did not trust in the name of the Unique Son of God.


## John 3:19 (id: 1043003019)

19Now God’s judicial ruling is as follows: {the one who is} the light entered the world, but people loved evil instead of him, because they do evil deeds.


## John 3:20 (id: 1043003020)

20{They love the darkness} because every person who continually does evil deeds hates {the one who is} the light and will never come to him. {They avoid the light} so that the light might not reveal what they do.


## John 3:21 (id: 1043003021)

21But the person who continually does true deeds comes to the one who is the light so that the light might show everyone what he does {and so that everyone might know} that God was helping him do these deeds.”


## John 3:22 (id: 1043003022)

22After those things happened, Jesus and his disciples entered the region of Judea. He stayed there for a while with his disciples and baptized many people.


## John 3:23 (id: 1043003023)

23John the Baptizer was also baptizing people near the town of Aenon, which is near the town of Salim in the region of Samaria. {He was baptizing people there} because there was much water in that place, and people kept coming to John to be baptized.


## John 3:24 (id: 1043003024)

24{John could do this} because John’s enemies had not yet put him in prison.


## John 3:25 (id: 1043003025)

25Then some of John’s disciples started arguing with a Jewish man about Jewish religious cleansing laws.


## John 3:26 (id: 1043003026)

26Those who were arguing came to John and said, “Teacher, there was a man who was with you when you were baptizing people on the other side of the Jordan River. You had testified about who he was. Look! Now he is baptizing people, and many people are going out to him!”


## John 3:27 (id: 1043003027)

27John answered, “Nobody can receive anything unless God gives it to him.


## John 3:28 (id: 1043003028)

28You are surely witnesses to me saying that I am not the Messiah, but I am the one whom God has sent before the Messiah.


## John 3:29 (id: 1043003029)

29The bride belongs to the bridegroom. I am like the friend of the bridegroom. I stand and listen to him and am very happy because I hear the bridegroom’s voice. Therefore, {because the bride is going to the bridegroom}, I am extremely joyful.


## John 3:30 (id: 1043003030)

30{Jesus, the bridegroom,} must become more influential, and I, {the bridegroom’s friend,} must become less influential.


## John 3:31 (id: 1043003031)

31Jesus comes from heaven, and he is greater than everyone and everything. Those {like myself} who are from the earth can only speak {with the limited perspective of someone} from the earth. The one who comes from heaven is greater than everyone and everything on the earth.


## John 3:32 (id: 1043003032)

32Jesus tells people about the things he has seen and heard {in heaven}, but very few people accept what he says.


## John 3:33 (id: 1043003033)

33{However,} whoever believes what Jesus says has verified that God is truthful.


## John 3:34 (id: 1043003034)

34{This is} because this Jesus whom God has sent says God’s words. {We know he says God’s words} because God surely gives his Spirit to him without limit.


## John 3:35 (id: 1043003035)

35God the Father loves the Son and has given him authority over everything.


## John 3:36 (id: 1043003036)

36Whoever trusts in God’s Son will live forever {with him in heaven}. Whoever does not obey the Son of God will never have eternal life. Rather, God will continually be furious with him.”


## John 4:1 (id: 1043004001)

1Later, {the religious group called} the Pharisees heard that Jesus was gaining more disciples than John the Baptizer and that he was baptizing more people than John was baptizing. Jesus also found out that the Pharisees had heard this.


## John 4:2 (id: 1043004002)

2(Jesus did not actually baptize anyone, but his disciples were baptizing people.)


## John 4:3 (id: 1043004003)

3{When he found out that the Pharisees were aware of him,} Jesus left the region of Judea and returned once more to the region of Galilee.


## John 4:4 (id: 1043004004)

4Now {to get to the region of Galilee} he had to go through the region of Samaria.


## John 4:5 (id: 1043004005)

5Next, they arrived at a city named Sychar in the region of Samaria. Sychar was near the plot of ground that Jacob had given to his son Joseph {a long time ago}.


## John 4:6 (id: 1043004006)

6(Jacob’s well was in that area.) After {arriving at Sychar} Jesus was very tired because of his long journey, so he sat down {to rest} next to Jacob’s well. It was about noon.


## John 4:7 (id: 1043004007)

7A Samaritan woman came out {to the well} {to lower a bucket on a rope} to pull up some water. Jesus said to her, “Please give me some water to drink.”


## John 4:8 (id: 1043004008)

8{He said this} because his disciples had left {him by himself} and had gone into the city in order to buy food.


## John 4:9 (id: 1043004009)

9And the Samaritan woman said to Jesus, “I am surprised that you, a Jew, are asking me, a woman from Samaria, for a drink.” ({She said this} because Jews usually would not have anything to do with Samaritans.)


## John 4:10 (id: 1043004010)

10Jesus replied to her, “If you had known the gift that God wants to give you, and if you had known who I am who is requesting a drink from you, you would have asked me for a drink, and I would have given you living water.”


## John 4:11 (id: 1043004011)

11The woman replied, “Sir, you do not have a bucket {with which to draw the water up out of the well,} and this well is deep. {Since you can’t get the water out of this well,} where did you get this living water from?


## John 4:12 (id: 1043004012)

12You are surely not greater than our father Jacob. He {dug this well} and gave it to us. He, his sons, and his livestock drank water from it as well.”


## John 4:13 (id: 1043004013)

13Jesus replied to her, “Everyone who drinks water from this well will become thirsty again.


## John 4:14 (id: 1043004014)

14But anyone who drinks the water that I will give him will never become thirsty again. Rather, the water that I will give him will become a spring of water inside him {that fills him up} and causes him to live forever {in heaven}.”


## John 4:15 (id: 1043004015)

15The woman said to Jesus, “Sir, please give me some of this water in order that I may never become thirsty again or have to come to this well to draw water again.”


## John 4:16 (id: 1043004016)

16Jesus told her, “Go get your husband and bring him here.”


## John 4:17 (id: 1043004017)

17The woman answered him, “I have no husband.” Jesus told her, “You are right in saying that you have no husband,


## John 4:18 (id: 1043004018)

18because you have had not one, but five, husbands, and the man you are currently {living with} is not your husband. What you have said {about not having a husband} is true.”


## John 4:19 (id: 1043004019)

19The woman said to Jesus, “Sir, I perceive that you are a prophet.


## John 4:20 (id: 1043004020)

20Our ancestors worshiped God right here on this mountain, but you Jews say that we must worship God at {your temple} in Jerusalem.”


## John 4:21 (id: 1043004021)

21Jesus told her, “Madam, believe me when I say that a time is coming when neither here on this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father.


## John 4:22 (id: 1043004022)

22You people {here in Samaria} worship the God whom you do not know. We Jews worship the God whom we know. {This is true} because the way to be saved {from your sins} comes from among the Jews.


## John 4:23 (id: 1043004023)

23Nevertheless, the time is coming and has now arrived when those who truly worship God will worship the Father spiritually and truthfully. {This is} because the Father indeed searches for such people to worship him.


## John 4:24 (id: 1043004024)

24God is a spiritual being, and those who worship him must worship him spiritually and truthfully.”


## John 4:25 (id: 1043004025)

25The woman said to Jesus, “I know that the Messiah will come. (He is the one called ‘Christ’ in Greek.) When he comes, he will tell us everything {that we need to know}.”


## John 4:26 (id: 1043004026)

26Jesus told her, “I, who am speaking to you now, I am the Messiah!”


## John 4:27 (id: 1043004027)

27Just at that moment, his disciples came back from the city. They were astonished because Jesus was talking {alone} with a woman {whom he didn’t know}. However, no one dared to ask him, “What do you want from her?” or “Why are you talking with her at all?”


## John 4:28 (id: 1043004028)

28At that time the woman left her water jar there and returned to the city. She said to the men of the city,


## John 4:29 (id: 1043004029)

29“Come and meet this man who told me so many things that I have done! He could not be the Messiah, could he?”


## John 4:30 (id: 1043004030)

30Those men left the city and came to Jesus.


## John 4:31 (id: 1043004031)

31{While the woman was gone,} Jesus’ disciples, {who had just returned with the food,} pleaded with him to eat. They said, “Teacher, please eat something!”


## John 4:32 (id: 1043004032)

32Jesus told them, “I have sustenance that you know nothing about!”


## John 4:33 (id: 1043004033)

33So they were saying to one another, “Surely no one else could have brought him something to eat, could they?”


## John 4:34 (id: 1043004034)

34Jesus told them, “This is what sustains me: It is to do what my Father—who sent me—wants and to complete my Father’s work.


## John 4:35 (id: 1043004035)

35{At this time of the year} you usually say, ‘There are four months left, and then we will harvest the crops.’ Listen to what I’m telling you. Look and see that these people are like fields that are now ready for harvest!


## John 4:36 (id: 1043004036)

36The one who harvests these crops receives payment and collects fruit, which is people receiving life forever {in heaven}. The result is that those who sow the seed and those who reap the harvest will be glad together.


## John 4:37 (id: 1043004037)

37What I’m going to say is true: One person sows the seeds, and another person harvests the crops.


## John 4:38 (id: 1043004038)

38I sent you disciples of mine to gather the harvest from a crop that you did not plant. Others have worked very hard {to plant the crop}, but you are now joining them in their work.”


## John 4:39 (id: 1043004039)

39Now many Samaritans who lived in the city of Sychar trusted in Jesus because of what the woman had told them. She said, “He told me so many things that I have done.”


## John 4:40 (id: 1043004040)

40When the Samaritans came to Jesus, they asked him to remain with them. So he stayed there with them for two more days.


## John 4:41 (id: 1043004041)

41Many more of them trusted in Jesus because of what he proclaimed to them.


## John 4:42 (id: 1043004042)

42The townspeople told the woman, “We believe in Jesus now, but not just because of what you told us about him. {We believe} because we have heard his message for ourselves. Now we know that this man truly is the one who saves the believers in the world {from their sins}.”


## John 4:43 (id: 1043004043)

43After he stayed for two days {with the Samaritans}, Jesus left the city of Sychar and entered the region of Galilee.


## John 4:44 (id: 1043004044)

44(Jesus wanted to go to Galilee because he himself confirmed that a prophet does not receive honor in the place where he grew up {and he did not want publicity}.)


## John 4:45 (id: 1043004045)

45Since this is true, when he arrived in the region of Galilee many of the people there merely welcomed him because they had seen all the amazing things he had done in Jerusalem during the recent Passover celebration, which they also had gone to.


## John 4:46 (id: 1043004046)

46Next, Jesus went back again to the town of Cana in the region of Galilee. {That was} where he had turned water into wine. There was an official of the king who lived nearby in the city of Capernaum and had a son who was very sick.


## John 4:47 (id: 1043004047)

47When that official heard that Jesus had come back to Galilee from Judea, he went to Jesus in Cana and asked him to come down to Capernaum and heal his son, because his son would die soon.


## John 4:48 (id: 1043004048)

48Jesus then told him, “You people will only trust in me {as the Messiah} if you see {me perform} wonderful miracles!”


## John 4:49 (id: 1043004049)

49The official of the king said to him, “Sir, please come down to my home in Capernaum before my son dies!”


## John 4:50 (id: 1043004050)

50Jesus told him, “Go home. Your son will live.” The man trusted what Jesus told him, and he started to go back home.


## John 4:51 (id: 1043004051)

51As the official was traveling down to his home in the city of Capernaum, his servants met him {along the road}. They told him, “Your child is going to live.”


## John 4:52 (id: 1043004052)

52He asked his servants, “At what time did my son start getting better?” They answered him, “At 1:00 PM yesterday his fever went away.”


## John 4:53 (id: 1043004053)

53And the boy’s father recognized that his son had recovered at the exact time that Jesus had told him that his son would live. So this same man, along with everyone who lived in his house, trusted in Jesus.


## John 4:54 (id: 1043004054)

54That was the second great miracle that Jesus did. {He did it during the time that} he came to the region of Galilee after leaving the region of Judea.


## John 5:1 (id: 1043005001)

1After those things happened, the time came for another Jewish festival, and Jesus walked up to the city of Jerusalem {to celebrate the festival}.


## John 5:2 (id: 1043005002)

2{There is a place} called the Sheep Gate in Jerusalem, {which is one of the gates going into the city}. There is a pool beside that gate which people called Bethesda in the language used by the Jews. Next to the pool are five porches with roofs.


## John 5:3 (id: 1043005003)

3Many people were lying on these porches. They were people who were ill, unable to see, unable to walk, or unable to move.


## John 5:4 (id: 1043005004)

4\[{They were lying there} because an angel from the Lord would occasionally come down and aggravate the water. Whoever was the first person to step into the water after the angel aggravated it was healed from whatever illness or infirmity that was afflicting him.]


## John 5:5 (id: 1043005005)

5There was a man lying near this pool called Bethesda who had been sick for 38 years.


## John 5:6 (id: 1043005006)

6Jesus saw this man lying near the pool, and he knew that he had been lying there for a long time. He asked the man, “Do you want your health to get better?”


## John 5:7 (id: 1043005007)

7The ill man answered him, “Sir, I don’t have anyone who can put me into the pool when an angel stirs the water. By the time I can put myself into the pool, someone else has already gone down into the pool {and been healed} before me, {so that I cannot be healed}.”


## John 5:8 (id: 1043005008)

8Jesus told him, “Stand up! Pick up the mat {that you have been lying on} and walk!”


## John 5:9 (id: 1043005009)

9Then Jesus healed the man at once, and the man picked up the mat {that he had been lying on} and walked. (Now this happened on {the Jewish day for rest known as} the Sabbath.


## John 5:10 (id: 1043005010)

10Because {it was the Jewish day for rest}, the Jewish leaders said to the man whom Jesus had healed, “Today is a day for rest. You are not allowed to carry your mat {on this day, because it is work}.”


## John 5:11 (id: 1043005011)

11The man whom Jesus had healed answered them, “The man who healed me told me to pick up the mat {that I had been lying on} and walk.’”


## John 5:12 (id: 1043005012)

12The Jewish leaders asked him, “Who told you to pick up your mat and walk?”


## John 5:13 (id: 1043005013)

13However, the man whom Jesus had healed did not know who had healed him, because Jesus had left the man without being noticed, since that area was crowded.


## John 5:14 (id: 1043005014)

14Later, Jesus found the man whom he had healed in the temple and told him, “Look, you are well now! Do not sin anymore, so that nothing worse {than your previous illness} might happen to you.”


## John 5:15 (id: 1043005015)

15That man went away and told the Jewish leaders that the man who had healed him was Jesus.


## John 5:16 (id: 1043005016)

16So the Jewish leaders started persecuting Jesus because he was miraculously healing people on the Jewish day for rest.


## John 5:17 (id: 1043005017)

17Jesus gave this answer to them, “God, my Father, is working today, so I am also working.”


## John 5:18 (id: 1043005018)

18As a consequence {of him saying this}, the Jewish leaders were trying to kill Jesus even more {than they had tried before}. {They wanted to kill him} because he was not only disobeying their rules for the day for rest but also because he was claiming that he was equal with God by saying that God was his own Father.


## John 5:19 (id: 1043005019)

19Because of {these accusations} Jesus replied to the Jewish leaders, “I am telling you {people} the truth: I, the Son, can do nothing on my own authority. I can only do what I perceive that God, the Father, is doing. Whatever the Father does, I, the Son, also do.


## John 5:20 (id: 1043005020)

20{This is true} because the Father loves me, the Son, and makes known to me everything that he is doing. The Father will also make known to me miraculous deeds that will be even greater than the miracles {that I have already done} in order that you might be astonished by them.


## John 5:21 (id: 1043005021)

21{This will happen} because I, the Son, give eternal life to anyone I want in the same way that the Father resurrects those who have died and gives them life again.


## John 5:22 (id: 1043005022)

22{This is true} because the Father does not judge anyone. Rather, he has given all authority to judge people to me, the Son.


## John 5:23 (id: 1043005023)

23{The Father did this} in order that everyone would honor me, the Son, in the same way that they honor the Father. Whoever does not honor me cannot honor my Father, who sent me.


## John 5:24 (id: 1043005024)

24I am telling you people the truth: Anyone who accepts and obeys my teachings and trusts God who sent me lives forever {with me in heaven}, and God does not judge him as guilty. Instead, that person has gone from being spiritually dead to being spiritually alive.


## John 5:25 (id: 1043005025)

25I am telling you people the truth: A time is coming and, in fact, is here already when those who have died will hear my voice, the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear me will live.


## John 5:26 (id: 1043005026)

26{This is true} because as the Father is able to make people alive, in the same way he has also given me, the Son, the ability to make people alive.


## John 5:27 (id: 1043005027)

27The Father has authorized me to judge all mankind, because I am the Son of Man.


## John 5:28 (id: 1043005028)

28Do not be surprised {that the Father has done} this, because there will be a time when everyone who has died will hear my voice.


## John 5:29 (id: 1043005029)

29Then they will come out of their graves. God will raise up those who have done good to give them eternal life. But God will raise up those who have done evil to condemn and punish them forever.


## John 5:30 (id: 1043005030)

30I can do nothing on my own. I judge according to what I hear {from the Father}, and I judge in a just manner. {I judge justly} because I do not try to do what I want. Rather, I do what my Father, who has sent me, wants.


## John 5:31 (id: 1043005031)

31If I alone were the only one to be a witness about myself, {according to the law of Moses} my witness would not be trustworthy.


## John 5:32 (id: 1043005032)

32Nevertheless, there is someone else who testifies about me, and I know that what he testifies about me is trustworthy.


## John 5:33 (id: 1043005033)

33You Jewish leaders sent messengers to John the Baptizer, and he told you the truth about me.


## John 5:34 (id: 1043005034)

34However, I do not need anyone to be a witness for me. Nevertheless, I am saying this about John the Baptizer in order that God might save you.


## John 5:35 (id: 1043005035)

35John the Baptizer {proclaimed God’s truth to you} like a burning and shining lamp. You were willing to rejoice for a while in the light {that was the truth that he proclaimed}.


## John 5:36 (id: 1043005036)

36However, the witness that I give about myself is even greater than the witness John gave about me. {This is} because this witness is the miraculous works that God the Father has allowed me to do. These very works that I am doing are proof that the Father has sent me.


## John 5:37 (id: 1043005037)

37Furthermore, my Father who sent me is the very one who has given testimony about me. None of you have ever heard him speak or seen what he looks like.


## John 5:38 (id: 1043005038)

38You also do not obey the Father’s teachings. {I know this is true} because you do not trust me, the very person he has sent!


## John 5:39 (id: 1043005039)

39You carefully study the Scriptures because you believe that by studying them you will be able to live forever {in heaven}. It is those very Scriptures that declare who I am.


## John 5:40 (id: 1043005040)

40Yet still you refuse to be my disciples in order that you might live {forever in heaven}.


## John 5:41 (id: 1043005041)

41I do not accept honor from anyone.


## John 5:42 (id: 1043005042)

42However, I know that you do not love God at all.


## John 5:43 (id: 1043005043)

43I have come with my Father’s authority, but still you do not accept me. If someone else were to come with his own authority, you would accept him.


## John 5:44 (id: 1043005044)

44You cannot possibly trust in me when you are honoring each other instead of desiring the one and only God to honor you!


## John 5:45 (id: 1043005045)

45Do not think that I am the one who will accuse you before my Father. Moses, the very person you have hoped would defend you, is actually the person who will accuse you.


## John 5:46 (id: 1043005046)

46{He will accuse you} because if you had trusted Moses, but you do not, then you would trust me, because Moses explained about me {in the law}.


## John 5:47 (id: 1043005047)

47Since you do not even trust what Moses wrote, you cannot possibly trust what I have said to you!”


## John 6:1 (id: 1043006001)

1After those things happened, Jesus crossed over to the opposite side of the Sea of Galilee, which some people also call the Sea of Tiberias.


## John 6:2 (id: 1043006002)

2A large crowd followed him because they had seen the miraculous signs he was performing, that is, healing people who were very ill.


## John 6:3 (id: 1043006003)

3Jesus walked up on a steep hillside and sat down there with his disciples.


## John 6:4 (id: 1043006004)

4(Now at that time the Jewish Passover celebration was about to take place.)


## John 6:5 (id: 1043006005)

5Jesus then looked up and saw a very large crowd of people walking toward him. He asked Philip, “Where will we buy bread in order to feed all these people?”


## John 6:6 (id: 1043006006)

6(He asked Philip this question in order to test his faith, because Jesus already knew what he was going to do about the problem.)


## John 6:7 (id: 1043006007)

7Philip replied to him, “If we had the money that a man can earn in 200 days of work, it would not be enough money to buy bread to give each person in this crowd even a little piece to eat.”


## John 6:8 (id: 1043006008)

8Another disciple of his, Simon Peter’s brother Andrew, told Jesus,


## John 6:9 (id: 1043006009)

9“There is a boy here who has five little loaves of barley bread and two small fish. Yet, these few loves and fish are certainly not enough to feed all these people!”


## John 6:10 (id: 1043006010)

10Jesus told his disciples to make the people sit down. Thus about 5,000 men sat down. (There was a lot of grass in that place {for them to sit down on}.)


## John 6:11 (id: 1043006011)

11Jesus then took the little loaves of barley bread, and he thanked God for the food. {Then} he {and his disciples} gave the loaves to the people who were sitting {on the grass} in order to eat. He did the same with the two fish. The people ate all the fish and bread that they wanted to eat.


## John 6:12 (id: 1043006012)

12When everyone had eaten until they were full, Jesus told his disciples to collect all the leftover, uneaten pieces of barley bread in order that none of it would be wasted.


## John 6:13 (id: 1043006013)

13Thus his disciples collected the pieces, and they filled 12 large baskets with the broken pieces that the people had left over from the five little loaves of barley bread.


## John 6:14 (id: 1043006014)

14Because {of this}, when the people saw this miraculous sign that Jesus had performed {in front of them}, they said, “Surely he is the Prophet whom {God promised} to send into the world!”


## John 6:15 (id: 1043006015)

15When Jesus knew that the people were planning to grab him in order to force him to be their king, he left them again and went up the hillside to be completely alone.


## John 6:16 (id: 1043006016)

16When it was evening, Jesus’ disciples walked down the hillside to the Sea of Galilee.


## John 6:17 (id: 1043006017)

17{They} got into a boat and started to sail across the sea to the town of Capernaum. (It had already become dark, and Jesus had still not joined them.)


## John 6:18 (id: 1043006018)

18Because the wind was blowing strongly, it was causing the sea to be very turbulent.


## John 6:19 (id: 1043006019)

19After Jesus’ disciples had rowed the boat around four\-and\-a\-half or five\-and\-a\-half kilometers out into the sea, they saw Jesus walking on the water and approaching the boat. They were terrified!


## John 6:20 (id: 1043006020)

20Jesus told them, “It is I, Jesus! Stop being afraid!”


## John 6:21 (id: 1043006021)

21They were very glad to take him into the boat. As soon as he was with them in the boat, their boat arrived at the place where they were going.


## John 6:22 (id: 1043006022)

22The day after Jesus had fed the crowd, the crowd of people that had stayed on the other side of the sea realized that there had been only one boat there {the day before}. {They also knew} that Jesus had not gone in the boat with his disciples.


## John 6:23 (id: 1043006023)

23(People came from the city of Tiberias in other boats. {They put their boats} near the place where the crowd had eaten the bread after the Lord Jesus had thanked God for it.)


## John 6:24 (id: 1043006024)

24So when the crowd realized that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they got into those boats and sailed to the city of Capernaum to look for Jesus.


## John 6:25 (id: 1043006025)

25The crowd found Jesus in Capernaum on the side of the Sea of Galilee that is opposite {from where he had fed them}. They asked him, “Teacher, {we know you didn’t come in a boat,} so when did you arrive here at Capernaum?”


## John 6:26 (id: 1043006026)

26Jesus replied, “I am telling you the truth: You are not looking for me because you saw the miraculous signs that I performed. Rather, {you are looking for me} only because you ate until you were full of the loaves of bread that I gave you.


## John 6:27 (id: 1043006027)

27Stop working for food that will soon spoil! Instead, work for the food that will bring you life forever {in heaven}! {That food} is the bread that I, the Son of Man, will give you. {I alone can give it to you} because God my Father approves of me.”


## John 6:28 (id: 1043006028)

28Then the crowd asked Jesus, “What works should we do in order to please God?”


## John 6:29 (id: 1043006029)

29Jesus answered them, “The work that God wants you to do is this: Trust in me, the one whom he has sent.”


## John 6:30 (id: 1043006030)

30The crowd asked him, “Then what miracle will you do in order for us to see it and trust in you? What will you do for us?


## John 6:31 (id: 1043006031)

31Our ancestors ate manna {when they wandered} in the wilderness {with Moses}, just as the prophets wrote: ‘God gave them bread out of heaven to eat.’”


## John 6:32 (id: 1043006032)

32Jesus answered them, “I am telling you the truth: It was not Moses who gave your ancestors that bread from heaven. No, it was my Father, who is now giving you the true bread out of heaven.


## John 6:33 (id: 1043006033)

33{This is true} because the true bread from God has come down from heaven and gives eternal life to the people in the world.”


## John 6:34 (id: 1043006034)

34{The crowd did not understand what he meant}, so they said to Jesus, “Sir, please give this bread to us all the time.”


## John 6:35 (id: 1043006035)

35Jesus told the crowd, “{Like food sustains physical life}, I am the bread that gives eternal life. {Unlike with food or drink}, anyone who trusts in me will surely be satisfied forever.


## John 6:36 (id: 1043006036)

36Nevertheless, I have already told you that even though you see me, you still do not trust me.


## John 6:37 (id: 1043006037)

37All the people my Father gives to me will come {and be my disciples}, and I will surely never drive away any of them.


## John 6:38 (id: 1043006038)

38{I will never do that} because I have not come down from heaven in order to do what I want. Rather, {I have come down} in order to do what my Father, who sent me, wants me to do.


## John 6:39 (id: 1043006039)

39This is what my Father, who sent me, wants: {He wants me} to keep all of those whom he has given to me. {He also wants} me to make these ones alive again on the last day {when I judge everyone}.


## John 6:40 (id: 1043006040)

40{This is true} because this is also what my Father wants: {He wants} everyone who recognizes who I, the Son, am, and trusts in me to live forever {with me in heaven}. I will make these ones alive again on the last day {when I judge everyone}.”


## John 6:41 (id: 1043006041)

41The Jewish leaders then started to grumble about Jesus, because he had said that he was the true bread that had come down out of heaven.


## John 6:42 (id: 1043006042)

42They said, “This is just Jesus, Joseph’s son! We know who his parents are. He cannot possibly have come down out of heaven as he claims!”


## John 6:43 (id: 1043006043)

43Jesus answered them, “Stop grumbling among yourselves {about what I just said}.


## John 6:44 (id: 1043006044)

44Only those whom my Father, who sent me, causes to come {and be my disciples} are able to do so. I myself will make those people {who come to me} alive again on the last day {when I judge everyone}.


## John 6:45 (id: 1043006045)

45The prophets wrote that God will teach everyone. Everyone who listens to and learns from my Father will come {and be my disciples}.


## John 6:46 (id: 1043006046)

46No one has seen God my Father other than me. I am the one who came from God. I alone have seen him.


## John 6:47 (id: 1043006047)

47I am telling you the truth: Whoever trusts in me will live forever {with me in heaven}.


## John 6:48 (id: 1043006048)

48I am the true bread that gives eternal life.


## John 6:49 (id: 1043006049)

49Your ancestors ate manna {when they wandered} in the wilderness {with Moses}, but they still died.


## John 6:50 (id: 1043006050)

50{But} this bread that I am talking about came down out of heaven in order that someone would eat it and that person’s spirit would never die.


## John 6:51 (id: 1043006051)

51I truly am this bread that gives eternal life and came down out of heaven. Anyone who eats this bread will live forever {with me in heaven}. My body is also this bread. I will give up my body for the sake of the eternal life of everyone in the world.”


## John 6:52 (id: 1043006052)

52The Jewish leaders then started arguing with each other. They said, “This man surely cannot give his body to us in order for us to eat it!”


## John 6:53 (id: 1043006053)

53So Jesus told them: “I am telling you the truth: You must eat the flesh of me, the Son of Man, and drink my blood. {If you do not do these things, then} you will never have eternal life.


## John 6:54 (id: 1043006054)

54Anyone who eats my flesh and drinks my blood will live forever {with me in heaven}. I will also make that person alive again on the last day {when I judge everyone}.


## John 6:55 (id: 1043006055)

55{This is so} because my flesh is true spiritual food, and my blood is true {spiritual} drink.


## John 6:56 (id: 1043006056)

56Those who eat my flesh and drink my blood will be united with me, and I will be united with them.


## John 6:57 (id: 1043006057)

57My Father makes everyone alive. He has sent me here, and I can make people alive because he has enabled me to do so. In the same way, those who feed on me will live forever because of what I will do for them.


## John 6:58 (id: 1043006058)

58I am this bread that has come down out of heaven. {This bread is} not like {the bread that} the Israelite ancestors ate {in the wilderness} but still eventually died. Anyone who eats me—this bread—will live forever {with me in heaven}.”


## John 6:59 (id: 1043006059)

59Jesus said these statements {to the Jewish leaders} in a synagogue while he was teaching in the city of Capernaum.


## John 6:60 (id: 1043006060)

60After they heard {what he had said}, many of Jesus’ disciples said, “What he is teaching is difficult to accept. Indeed, no one can accept it!”


## John 6:61 (id: 1043006061)

61{Although no one told} him, Jesus knew that his disciples were grumbling about what he had said. {So} he asked them, “Did my teaching offend you?


## John 6:62 (id: 1043006062)

62{If this teaching has offended you,} then {would you also be offended} if you saw me, the Son of Man, ascending to heaven where I was formerly?


## John 6:63 (id: 1043006063)

63The Holy Spirit is the only one who can give anyone eternal life. Human nature is useless in this matter. What I have taught you comes from the Holy Spirit and gives eternal life.


## John 6:64 (id: 1043006064)

64Nevertheless, some of you do not believe what I have said.” (Jesus said this because he knew since he began his work who would not believe him and who would eventually betray him.)


## John 6:65 (id: 1043006065)

65Then Jesus said, “Because {some of you do not believe me}, I told you earlier that only those to whom God the Father has given the ability to come {and be my disciple} will be able to do so.”


## John 6:66 (id: 1043006066)

66After Jesus said these things, a lot of his disciples went back {to doing what they had been doing before they met him} and stopped being his disciples.


## John 6:67 (id: 1043006067)

67Because {so many left him}, Jesus asked his 12 representatives, “Surely you do not also want to leave me, do you?”


## John 6:68 (id: 1043006068)

68Simon Peter replied, “Lord, {if we were to leave you}, there is no one else we could go to! Only you teach the message {that allows us} to live forever {in heaven}!


## John 6:69 (id: 1043006069)

69We trust in you, and we know for certain that you are the Holy One who has come from God!”


## John 6:70 (id: 1043006070)

70Jesus answered them, “I surely chose all you 12 men to represent me, but one of you is under the control of Satan!”


## John 6:71 (id: 1043006071)

71({When Jesus said this} he was talking about Judas, Simon Iscariot’s son, because he was the one among Jesus’ 12 representatives who would later betray Jesus.)


## John 7:1 (id: 1043007001)

1After those things happened, Jesus walked around in the region of Galilee because he did not want to walk around in the region of Judea. {He avoided Judea} because the Jewish leaders there were trying to find a way to kill him.


## John 7:2 (id: 1043007002)

2(Now at that time the Jewish Shelters celebration was about to take place.)


## John 7:3 (id: 1043007003)

3Jesus’ brothers told him, “Leave here and go to the region of Judea in order that your disciples can also observe you doing miraculous works.


## John 7:4 (id: 1043007004)

4{Do your miraculous works in Judea} because no one who wants to be famous does anything secretly. Since you are doing all these miracles, reveal who you {claim to be} to everyone {by doing miraculous works}!”


## John 7:5 (id: 1043007005)

5{Jesus’ brothers said this} because not even they believed he was the Messiah.


## John 7:6 (id: 1043007006)

6Because {they did not believe in him,} Jesus told them, “This is not the right time for me {to go to Jerusalem}, but you can go there whenever you want.


## John 7:7 (id: 1043007007)

7No one in the world can hate you. However, everyone hates me because I declare that they do evil deeds.


## John 7:8 (id: 1043007008)

8You go {to Jerusalem} for the celebration. I am not going to the celebration yet, because now is not the right time for me to go.”


## John 7:9 (id: 1043007009)

9After saying that to his brothers, Jesus stayed a little longer in the region of Galilee.


## John 7:10 (id: 1043007010)

10However, a few days after his brothers left for the festival, he also went, but he did so secretly.


## John 7:11 (id: 1043007011)

11Because the Jewish leaders {expected Jesus to be} at the celebration, they tried to find him. They asked people, “Where is that man?”


## John 7:12 (id: 1043007012)

12The crowds were quietly speaking a lot about Jesus. Some people said, “He is a good man!” But others said, “No! He deceives the crowd!”


## John 7:13 (id: 1043007013)

13Nevertheless, the people were afraid of the Jewish leaders, so they didn’t speak about Jesus in public.


## John 7:14 (id: 1043007014)

14About halfway through the Shelters celebration, Jesus entered the temple {courtyard} and started teaching the people there.


## John 7:15 (id: 1043007015)

15The Jewish leaders were shocked {at his teaching}. They said, “This man has not received religious training. He cannot possibly know the scriptures so well!”


## John 7:16 (id: 1043007016)

16Jesus replied to them, “What I teach does not come from myself. On the contrary, it comes from God, who sent me.


## John 7:17 (id: 1043007017)

17If anyone wants to do what God wants, then that person will know that what I am teaching has come from God and not only by my own authority.


## John 7:18 (id: 1043007018)

18Anyone who speaks on his own authority only wants to glorify himself. However, anyone who wants to glorify the person who sent him speaks the truth and acts righteously.


## John 7:19 (id: 1043007019)

19Moses did indeed give you laws {from God}. None of you completely obeys those laws. {Since that is true,} why are you trying to kill me {for supposedly disobeying those same laws that you don’t obey}?”


## John 7:20 (id: 1043007020)

20Some people in the crowd replied, “A demon is controlling you! No one is trying to kill you!”


## John 7:21 (id: 1043007021)

21Jesus replied to the crowd, “{Because} I did one miraculous healing on the day for rest, all of you are shocked.


## John 7:22 (id: 1043007022)

22Because {some works like healing would occur on the day for rest}, Moses gave you a law about circumcision. {That law states that you must circumcise your sons exactly seven days after they are born.} ({Circumcision} did not actually begin with Moses, but {this rite} began with your forefathers, {Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob}.) {Because of that law,} sometimes you must work on the day for rest by circumcising your male babies.


## John 7:23 (id: 1043007023)

23Since you sometimes circumcise someone on the day for rest in order to avoid disobeying the law of Moses, you shouldn’t be angry with me for {doing a good work like} healing someone on that day!


## John 7:24 (id: 1043007024)

24Stop judging me according to what you have seen! Rather, judge me according to what God says is right.”


## John 7:25 (id: 1043007025)

25Some of the people in the crowd who dwelled in Jerusalem then said, “This is the man that our leaders are trying to kill!


## John 7:26 (id: 1043007026)

26Look! He is saying these things publicly, but our leaders are not saying anything to oppose him. Can it be that our leaders really know that he is the Messiah?


## John 7:27 (id: 1043007027)

27But {this man cannot be the Messiah!} We know where this man came from, but when the Messiah comes, no one will know where he is from.”


## John 7:28 (id: 1043007028)

28Jesus then spoke loudly while he was teaching in the temple {courtyard}. He said, “Yes, you know me, and you know where I have come from. But I have not come here on my own authority. Rather, the one who sent me is the real God, and you do not know him.


## John 7:29 (id: 1043007029)

29I know him because I have come from him. He is the one who sent me.”


## John 7:30 (id: 1043007030)

30Because {Jesus said these things}, the Jewish leaders wanted to arrest him, but no one could seize him, because it was not yet the right time for him {to die}.


## John 7:31 (id: 1043007031)

31In contrast {to the Jewish leaders}, many in the crowd of people trusted in Jesus. They kept saying, “When the Messiah comes, he surely will not be able to do more miraculous signs than this man!”


## John 7:32 (id: 1043007032)

32Some of the Pharisees overheard them quietly speaking these things about Jesus. Then they and the ruling priests sent temple guards to arrest him.


## John 7:33 (id: 1043007033)

33Because {they did this}, Jesus said, “I will only be with you for a little while longer. Soon I will go back to God, who sent me.


## John 7:34 (id: 1043007034)

34You will search for me, but you will not find me. You will not be able to come to the place where I will be.”


## John 7:35 (id: 1043007035)

35So the Jewish leaders said to each other, “Where can this man go where we cannot find him? Will he actually go to those Jews who are spread throughout the world outside of Israel? Will he even teach the people there who aren’t Jews?


## John 7:36 (id: 1043007036)

36What did he mean when he said that we will search for him, but we will not find him, and we will not be able to come to the place where he will be?”


## John 7:37 (id: 1043007037)

37Now on the final and most important day of the {Shelters} celebration, Jesus stood up {in the temple courtyard} and spoke loudly. He said, “Anyone who is thirsty should come to me and drink {what I will give them}!


## John 7:38 (id: 1043007038)

38This is what the prophets wrote in the scripture about anyone who trusts in me: ‘Water that gives eternal life will abundantly flow from that person’s innermost being.’”


## John 7:39 (id: 1043007039)

39(Now Jesus said this about the Holy Spirit, whom God was going to give to those who trusted in Jesus. {He said this} because {at that time God had not yet sent} the Holy Spirit {to dwell within those who trusted in him}, because Jesus had not yet received honor {by his death, resurrection, and return to heaven}.)


## John 7:40 (id: 1043007040)

40After some people among the crowd heard what Jesus had said, they said, “He is truly the Prophet {whom God had said would come}!”


## John 7:41 (id: 1043007041)

41Some other people in the crowd said, “He is the Messiah!” However, others {who mistakenly thought that Jesus was born in Galilee,} said, “But the Messiah cannot possibly come from the region of Galilee.


## John 7:42 (id: 1043007042)

42The prophets wrote in the scriptures that the Messiah must come from the descendants of King David and {that he must come} from the village of Bethlehem, where David came from!”


## John 7:43 (id: 1043007043)

43Thus the people in the crowd divided {into opposing groups} on account of Jesus.


## John 7:44 (id: 1043007044)

44(Some of the people in the crowd wanted to arrest him. However, no one seized him.)


## John 7:45 (id: 1043007045)

45The temple guards then returned to the ruling priests and Pharisees, who asked them, “Why did you not arrest him and bring him here?”


## John 7:46 (id: 1043007046)

46The temple guards replied, “No one has ever spoken like this man has!”


## John 7:47 (id: 1043007047)

47Because {the guards said that,} the Pharisees replied by asking, “Can it be that he has deceived you as well?


## John 7:48 (id: 1043007048)

48Surely, none of the members of our highest governing council or us Pharisees have trusted in him!


## John 7:49 (id: 1043007049)

49However, this crowd of people does not know God’s laws, and God has cursed them!”


## John 7:50 (id: 1043007050)

50Then Nicodemus spoke. (He was the man who had come to Jesus {at night to speak with him} in the past. {He had done this} even though he was one of the Pharisees, {which was a group that usually opposed Jesus}.) He told the Jewish religious leaders,


## John 7:51 (id: 1043007051)

51“Our Jewish laws surely do not allow us to condemn someone without first listening to him and learning about what he has done.”


## John 7:52 (id: 1043007052)

52They replied to him insultingly, “Surely, you are not from the region of Galilee as well! Are you? Read through the scriptures carefully! {If you do that,} you will see that no prophet comes from Galilee.”


## John 7:53 (id: 1043007053)

53\[Then they all left and went to their own homes.


## John 8:1 (id: 1043008001)

1Jesus went to the Mount of Olives {and stayed near there that night}.


## John 8:2 (id: 1043008002)

2At dawn the next morning, Jesus returned to the temple {courtyard} and many people came to him.


## John 8:3 (id: 1043008003)

3Some of the teachers of the law and the Pharisees brought a woman to him. They had apprehended her while she was committing adultery. They made her stand up in the midst of this group.


## John 8:4 (id: 1043008004)

4The priests wanted to test Jesus in order to be able to accuse him {of breaking the law of Moses before the highest Jewish governing council}. So they said to him, “Teacher, we apprehended this woman while she was committing adultery, the very act itself!


## John 8:5 (id: 1043008005)

5Now Moses commanded us in the law that we must kill such women with stones. Nevertheless, what do you say we should do?”


## John 8:6 (id: 1043008006)

6However, Jesus bent down and wrote something on the ground with his finger.


## John 8:7 (id: 1043008007)

7While they continued to question him, he got up and told them, “Let the one among you who has never sinned throw the first stone at her {and lead the rest to kill her}!”


## John 8:8 (id: 1043008008)

8Then Jesus stooped down again and wrote something on the ground with his finger.


## John 8:9 (id: 1043008009)

9{After he did this,} those Jewish leaders {who were questioning him} started walking away, one by one. The older ones left first and then the younger ones. Then only Jesus was there with the woman in the midst of the people.


## John 8:10 (id: 1043008010)

10Jesus stood up and asked her, “Where are the men {who were accusing you}? Has no one condemned you {to be punished}?”


## John 8:11 (id: 1043008011)

11The woman replied, “There is no one, sir.” Then Jesus said, “I do not condemn you {to be punished} either. Leave, and from now on do not sin like this anymore!”]


## John 8:12 (id: 1043008012)

12Jesus spoke to the people again. He said, “I am the one who gives God’s good and true light to the people in the world. Anyone who becomes my disciple will never walk in {sinful} darkness {again}. Rather, that person will have God’s good and true light that gives eternal life.”


## John 8:13 (id: 1043008013)

13The Pharisees then told him, “You are the only witness for yourself! {Since the law of Moses requires at least two witnesses,} what you say cannot be true!”


## John 8:14 (id: 1043008014)

14Jesus replied, “Even if I were the only witness for myself, what I say is still true because I know where I came from and {I know} where I am going. Nevertheless, you do not know where I came from and {you do not know} where I am going.


## John 8:15 (id: 1043008015)

15You judge people according to human standards. {However,} I have not come to judge anyone {in that manner}.


## John 8:16 (id: 1043008016)

16Even when I do judge people, I will judge them according to the true standard, because I do not judge people on my own. Rather, I and my Father who sent me, {will judge people together}.


## John 8:17 (id: 1043008017)

17Moses even wrote in your law that when at least two witnesses say the same thing, then what they say is true.


## John 8:18 (id: 1043008018)

18I am my own witness, but my Father who sent me is also a witness for me. {Therefore, what I say is true}.”


## John 8:19 (id: 1043008019)

19Because {Jesus said his father was a witness for him,} the Pharisees asked him, “Where is your father?” Jesus replied, “You do not know me, and you do not know my Father. If you knew me, you would also know my Father, {but you do not}.”


## John 8:20 (id: 1043008020)

20He said these things about himself while he was teaching in the temple {courtyard}. {He said them} at the place {in the temple courtyard} where people brought money offerings. Nobody apprehended him, because it was not yet the right time for him to die.


## John 8:21 (id: 1043008021)

21Jesus then told the people again, “I am going away, and you will search for me, but since you sinfully reject me, you will die without God forgiving you. You will not be able to come to the place where I am going.”


## John 8:22 (id: 1043008022)

22The Jewish leaders then said {among themselves}, “Perhaps he plans to kill himself, and that is {what he means} when he says that we will not be able to come to the place where he is going.”


## John 8:23 (id: 1043008023)

23Jesus told them, “You are from this earth below, but I am from heaven above. You belong to this sinful world. I do not belong to this world.


## John 8:24 (id: 1043008024)

24Because of this I told you that you will die without God forgiving you for all the sins that you have committed. This will certainly happen unless you trust that I am {God, as I say I am}.”


## John 8:25 (id: 1043008025)

25Because {he said that}, they asked him, “Who are you?” Jesus replied, “That is what I have been telling you ever since the beginning!


## John 8:26 (id: 1043008026)

26I could say many things about you and judge you, {but I won’t do those things at this time}. Rather, I will tell the people in the world only what I have heard from the one who sent me. He always says the truth.”


## John 8:27 (id: 1043008027)

27(They did not understand that Jesus was telling them about his Father {in heaven}.)


## John 8:28 (id: 1043008028)

28So Jesus told them, “When you have lifted me up to kill me, the Son of Man, you will know that I am {God}, and {you will know} that I do not do anything on my own authority. Rather, I only say what my Father has taught me to say.


## John 8:29 (id: 1043008029)

29My Father, who sent me, is always with me. He has never abandoned me, because I always do only the things that delight him.”


## John 8:30 (id: 1043008030)

30While Jesus was saying these things, many more people believed that he was the Messiah.


## John 8:31 (id: 1043008031)

31Jesus then told the Jews who now believed that he was the Messiah, “If you obey what I teach you, then you are my genuine disciples.


## John 8:32 (id: 1043008032)

32{Furthermore,} you will know God’s truth, and {believing that} truth will free you {from what has enslaved you}.”


## John 8:33 (id: 1043008033)

33They answered him, “We are the descendants of Abraham. We have never been anyone’s slaves! Why do you say that we need to be free?”


## John 8:34 (id: 1043008034)

34Jesus replied, “I am telling you the truth: Anyone who sins {is controlled by his sinful desires like} a slave {is controlled by his master}.


## John 8:35 (id: 1043008035)

35Slaves do not remain as {members of their master’s} family forever, {but may be freed or sold}. {However,} a son is a member of the family forever.


## John 8:36 (id: 1043008036)

36So if the Son frees you {from being slaves to sin}, you will absolutely be able to refrain {from sinning}.


## John 8:37 (id: 1043008037)

37I know that you are Abraham’s physical descendants. However, you are trying to kill me because you refuse to trust what I say.


## John 8:38 (id: 1043008038)

38I am telling you about the things that my Father has shown me. Therefore, {I say that} you do what your father has told you to do.”


## John 8:39 (id: 1043008039)

39They replied to him, “Abraham is our ancestor.” Jesus said to them, “If you were Abraham’s descendants, you would be doing the same things he did.


## John 8:40 (id: 1043008040)

40I have been telling you the true things that God told me, but you are trying to kill me. Abraham did not do something like that.


## John 8:41 (id: 1043008041)

41You are doing the same things that your real father did.” They told him, “We are not illegitimate children, {like you are}! We have only one Father, and that is God.”


## John 8:42 (id: 1043008042)

42Jesus told them, “If God were your Father, which he is not, you would love me because I came from him and have come to this world. {This is true} because I did not come on my own authority. Rather, I came because God sent me.


## John 8:43 (id: 1043008043)

43Do you know why you do not understand what I say? It is because you do not accept {and obey} what I have told you!


## John 8:44 (id: 1043008044)

44You belong to your father, the devil, and you desire to do what he desires. He has been murdering people since the time people first {sinned}. He has rejected what is true, because he never speaks those true things. Whenever he lies, he is doing what is natural for him to do, because he is a liar. He is even the origin of lying.


## John 8:45 (id: 1043008045)

45Yet you do not believe me, because I tell you what is true!


## John 8:46 (id: 1043008046)

46{Since I have never sinned,} none of you can prove that I have. Since I tell you what is true, there is no good reason for you to not believe what I say!


## John 8:47 (id: 1043008047)

47Those who belong to God accept {and obey} what he has said. Since {this is true,} you do not accept {and obey} what God has said, because you do not belong to God.”


## John 8:48 (id: 1043008048)

48The Jews opposing Jesus replied to him, “We are certainly correct when we say that you are one of the Samaritans, {whom we hate,} and that a demon is controlling you!”


## John 8:49 (id: 1043008049)

49Jesus replied, “A demon is not controlling me! On the contrary, I honor my Father {in heaven}, and you dishonor me!


## John 8:50 (id: 1043008050)

50I do not desire to persuade people to praise me. There is someone else who desires to do that and judges {whether you or I am telling the truth}.


## John 8:51 (id: 1043008051)

51I am telling you the truth: Anyone who obeys my teaching will surely never die!”


## John 8:52 (id: 1043008052)

52The Jews opposing Jesus said to him, “Now we are sure that a demon is controlling you! Abraham and the prophets died long ago! Yet you say that anyone who obeys your teaching will surely never die!


## John 8:53 (id: 1043008053)

53You are surely not greater than our ancestor Abraham! He died and all the prophets also died. {So} who do you think you are?”


## John 8:54 (id: 1043008054)

54Jesus replied, “If I persuade people to praise me, that praise would be worthless. My Father is the one who praises me. He is the one whom you say is your God.


## John 8:55 (id: 1043008055)

55Although you do not know God, I do know him. If I said that I did not know him, I would be a liar like each of you. In contrast to you, I know him, and I always obey what he says.


## John 8:56 (id: 1043008056)

56Your ancestor Abraham was overjoyed {to think} that he could see me come to the world. {God allowed him} to see me come, and he was happy.”


## John 8:57 (id: 1043008057)

57Because {Jesus said this}, the Jews opposing him told him, “{Abraham died a long time ago, and} you are not even fifty years old! How can you have seen Abraham?”


## John 8:58 (id: 1043008058)

58Jesus told them, “I am telling you the truth: I was {God} before Abraham was born!”


## John 8:59 (id: 1043008059)

59Because {he was claiming to be God,} the Jews opposing Jesus picked up rocks to throw at him {to kill him}. But Jesus hid {in the crowd} and left the temple {courtyard}.


## John 9:1 (id: 1043009001)

1While Jesus was walking along the path, he saw a man who had been blind since the day he was born.


## John 9:2 (id: 1043009002)

2His disciples asked him, “Teacher, whose sin caused this man to be blind when he was born? Did this man or his parents sin?”


## John 9:3 (id: 1043009003)

3Jesus replied, “It was neither the sin of this man nor the sin of his parents {that caused him to be blind when he was born}. Rather, {he was blind when he was born} so that I might show people the miraculous works God will do in him.


## John 9:4 (id: 1043009004)

4While I am still with you, we must do the miraculous works that my Father who sent me wants us to do. Just like day is followed by night, when people cannot work, a time will come when it is too late for us to do what God wants us to do.


## John 9:5 (id: 1043009005)

5While I am still living in this world, I am the one who gives God’s good and true light to the people in the world.”


## John 9:6 (id: 1043009006)

6When he said this, he spat on the dirt and made mud by mixing his saliva {with the dirt}. Then he spread that mud on the blind man’s eyes.


## John 9:7 (id: 1043009007)

7Then Jesus said to the blind man, “Go and wash {the mud off} in the pool of Siloam!” (‘Siloam’ means ‘sent’ {in Aramaic}). So the man left and washed {the mud off in that pool}. Then he went {home} when he was able to see.


## John 9:8 (id: 1043009008)

8The man’s neighbors and others who had seen him in the past and knew that he was a beggar said, “This is surely the man who used to sit here and beg!”


## John 9:9 (id: 1043009009)

9Some people said, “Yes, he is that man.” Other people said, “No, but he just looks like that man.” However, the man himself said, “Yes, I am the man who was blind!”


## John 9:10 (id: 1043009010)

10So they asked him, “How is it that you can see now?”


## John 9:11 (id: 1043009011)

11He replied, “The man people call Jesus made mud {with dirt and his saliva} and spread it on my eyes. Then he told me to go to the pool of Siloam and wash {the mud off}. So I went there and washed {the mud off}. Then I was able to see {for the first time}.”


## John 9:12 (id: 1043009012)

12They asked him, “Where is that man?” He replied, “I do not know where he is.”


## John 9:13 (id: 1043009013)

13{Some of the people there} took the man who used to be blind to some of the Pharisees.


## John 9:14 (id: 1043009014)

14(Now the day when Jesus made the mud {with his saliva} and enabled the man to see was the Jewish day for rest.)


## John 9:15 (id: 1043009015)

15Then the Pharisees questioned the man for a second time. {This time} as well, they asked him about how he was now able to see. He told them, “The man placed mud on my eyes, and I washed {it off}, and now I {am able to} see {for the first time}.”


## John 9:16 (id: 1043009016)

16Some of the Pharisees then said, “{We know that} this man has not come from God, because he does not follow the rules for the Jewish day for rest.” Some other Pharisees said, “Surely a sinful man could not do the kinds of miraculous signs that this man does!” So the Pharisees disagreed with each other {regarding who Jesus was}.


## John 9:17 (id: 1043009017)

17So the Pharisees asked the blind man again, “What do you say about this man, since you say that he is the one who enabled you to see?” The man said, “He must be a prophet.”


## John 9:18 (id: 1043009018)

18Because {the man believed that Jesus was a prophet}, the Jewish leaders did not believe that the man had been blind and then became able to see until after they summoned the man’s parents {in order to question them}.


## John 9:19 (id: 1043009019)

19They asked his parents, “Is this man your son? Do you say that he was blind when he was born? {If that is so,} then how is he able to see at this time?”


## John 9:20 (id: 1043009020)

20His parents replied, “We are certain that this man is our son. We are also certain that he was blind when he was born.


## John 9:21 (id: 1043009021)

21Nevertheless, we do not know how he is able to see at this time. We also do not know who enabled him to see. Ask him. He is old enough to speak on his own behalf.”


## John 9:22 (id: 1043009022)

22(The Jewish leaders had previously agreed among themselves that they would ban anyone who declared that Jesus was the Messiah from entering the Jewish meeting place. Because of this, the man’s parents were afraid of them and told them those things.)


## John 9:23 (id: 1043009023)

23That is also why they said to the Jewish leaders, “Ask him. He is old enough.”


## John 9:24 (id: 1043009024)

24So the Jewish leaders summoned for a second time the man who had been blind. They told him, “Glorify God {by speaking only the truth}! We ourselves are certain that this man {who you say healed you} is sinful.”


## John 9:25 (id: 1043009025)

25The man whom Jesus healed replied, “I do not know if he is sinful or not. One thing I do know is that I used to be blind, but now I can see.”


## John 9:26 (id: 1043009026)

26They then asked him, “What did he do to you {in order to heal you}? How did he enable you to see?”


## John 9:27 (id: 1043009027)

27He replied, “I have already told you the answers to those questions, but you did not listen to what I said. Why do you want me to tell you again? Could it be that you also desire to become his disciples?”


## John 9:28 (id: 1043009028)

28Then they spoke insultingly to him: “You are that man’s disciple! As for us, we are Moses’s disciples!


## John 9:29 (id: 1043009029)

29We are certain that God spoke to Moses {long ago}. As for this man, we do not even know where he came from!”


## John 9:30 (id: 1043009030)

30The man replied, “I am amazed! You do not even know where he came from, but he is the one who enabled me to see!


## John 9:31 (id: 1043009031)

31We are certain that God does not respond to {the prayers of} sinful people. Rather, he responds to {the prayers of} people who worship him and who do what he wants them to do.


## John 9:32 (id: 1043009032)

32Never before has anyone ever heard that someone enabled a man to see who was blind when he was born!


## John 9:33 (id: 1043009033)

33If this man had not come from God, he could not have done even one {miracle like that}!”


## John 9:34 (id: 1043009034)

34The Jewish leaders replied to him, “You were born blind entirely as a result of {your parents’} sins! How dare you teach us!” Then they banned him from the Jewish meeting place.


## John 9:35 (id: 1043009035)

35Jesus heard that the Jewish leaders had banned the man he had healed from the Jewish meeting place. When he {searched for him and} found him, he asked him, “Do you trust the Son of Man?”


## John 9:36 (id: 1043009036)

36The man answered, “Sir, who is he? {Please tell me,} so that I may trust him.”


## John 9:37 (id: 1043009037)

37Jesus told him, “You have already seen him. I am that very person who is talking to you now.”


## John 9:38 (id: 1043009038)

38The man said, “Lord, I trust {that you are the Son of Man}.” Then he went down on his knees and worshiped Jesus.


## John 9:39 (id: 1043009039)

39Jesus said, “I have come into this world in order to judge its people. {The result will be} that the people who realize they do not perceive God’s truth may perceive it, like a blind person becoming able to see. {Another result will be that} the people who think they perceive God’s truth will not perceive it, like a person who sees and becomes blind.”


## John 9:40 (id: 1043009040)

40When some of the Pharisees who were near Jesus heard him say this, they asked him, “Do you think that we also cannot perceive God’s truth, like blind people?”


## John 9:41 (id: 1043009041)

41Jesus replied, “If you recognized that you are spiritually blind, you would not be guilty of sin. However, because you claim to perceive God’s truth, like someone who sees, you are still guilty of your sin.”


## John 10:1 (id: 1043010001)

1“I am telling you the truth: Anyone who enters into the sheep pen by any way other than the pen’s gate is a thief or bandit {who has come to steal the sheep}.


## John 10:2 (id: 1043010002)

2The man who enters the sheep pen through the gate is the shepherd {who takes care} of the sheep.


## John 10:3 (id: 1043010003)

3The man who guards the gate {when the shepherd is away} opens the gate for the shepherd {when he comes}. The sheep hear the sound of the shepherd’s voice. He summons by name {each of} the sheep that belong to him and leads them out of the pen.


## John 10:4 (id: 1043010004)

4After the shepherd has brought out of the pen all of the sheep that belong to him, he walks in front of them. His sheep follow him {from behind} because they recognize the sound of his voice.


## John 10:5 (id: 1043010005)

5His sheep will never follow someone whom they do not know. Rather, they will run away from him because they do not recognize the voices of people they do not know.”


## John 10:6 (id: 1043010006)

6Jesus told this illustration {from the work that shepherds do} to the Pharisees. Nevertheless, they did not understand what the illustration meant.


## John 10:7 (id: 1043010007)

7So Jesus spoke to them again, “I am telling you the truth: I am the gate through which the sheep enter into the sheep pen.


## John 10:8 (id: 1043010008)

8All the leaders who came before me {without God’s authority} were thieves and bandits. However, the true sheep did not obey them.


## John 10:9 (id: 1043010009)

9I myself am the gate {to heaven}. God will save {from eternal punishment} anyone who comes to him by trusting in me. {Whoever trusts in me} will be like a sheep who walks around safely and finds food.


## John 10:10 (id: 1043010010)

10Your leaders are like thieves who come only to steal, kill, and destroy the sheep. I have come to give the sheep eternal life, which will be full {of blessings}.


## John 10:11 (id: 1043010011)

11I myself am like a good shepherd. The good shepherd is willing to die {in order to protect and to save} his sheep, {and so am I willing to die for my disciples}.


## John 10:12 (id: 1043010012)

12{Suppose that} someone hires a man who is not a shepherd to protect sheep that do not belong to that man. When he sees a wolf coming {to kill the sheep}, he leaves the sheep and runs away, so the wolf snatches some of them and causes some others to scatter.


## John 10:13 (id: 1043010013)

13{The hired man runs away} because he was {only protecting the sheep} in order to receive money. He does not care about what happens to the sheep.


## John 10:14 (id: 1043010014)

14I myself am like a good shepherd. {Just like a good shepherd knows his sheep and his sheep know him,} I know those who belong to me, and they know me.


## John 10:15 (id: 1043010015)

15{We know each other} in the same way that my Father and I know each other. I am willing to die for the benefit of those sheep {who belong to me}.


## John 10:16 (id: 1043010016)

16There are also sheep that belong to me and are from a different sheep pen. {They are people who are not Jews.} I must also bring them to myself. They will respond to what I say, and all those who belong to me will be united as one flock, and I will be their one shepherd.


## John 10:17 (id: 1043010017)

17My Father loves me because I will willingly die in order that I may make myself alive again.


## John 10:18 (id: 1043010018)

18Nobody is forcing me to die. Rather, I myself choose to die. I have authority to willfully die and I have authority to make myself alive again. That is the work my Father has commanded me to do.”


## John 10:19 (id: 1043010019)

19The Jewish leaders divided {into opposing groups} again on account of what Jesus had said.


## John 10:20 (id: 1043010020)

20Many of the Jewish leaders said, “A demon is controlling him, and he is crazy! Do not listen to him!”


## John 10:21 (id: 1043010021)

21Some other people said, “What he is saying is not something a man controlled by a demon would ever say. Surely a demon cannot possibly enable a blind person to see!”


## John 10:22 (id: 1043010022)

22Then the feast to celebrate the temple dedication in Jerusalem took place.


## John 10:23 (id: 1043010023)

23Jesus was walking in the temple courtyard in the place called Solomon’s Porch.


## John 10:24 (id: 1043010024)

24The Jewish leaders gathered around Jesus and said, “How long will you keep us wondering about who you are? If you are the Messiah, then tell us plainly {so that we can know}.”


## John 10:25 (id: 1043010025)

25Jesus answered them, “I have told you, but you still do not believe me. The miraculous deeds I do by my Father’s authority tell you what you need to know about me.


## John 10:26 (id: 1043010026)

26However, you people still do not believe in me, because you do not belong to me. You are like sheep that are not part of my flock.


## John 10:27 (id: 1043010027)

27{Just like sheep obey the voice of their shepherd,} my people respond to what I say. I know them, and they are my disciples.


## John 10:28 (id: 1043010028)

28I enable them to live forever {with God in heaven}. No one can ever destroy them, and {no one can ever} take them away from me.


## John 10:29 (id: 1043010029)

29My Father gave them to me. He is greater than anyone, and no one is able to take them away from him.


## John 10:30 (id: 1043010030)

30My father and I are one God.”


## John 10:31 (id: 1043010031)

31The Jewish leaders again picked up stones in order to throw them at him and kill him.


## John 10:32 (id: 1043010032)

32Jesus said to them, “You have seen me do many miraculous good deeds that my Father told me to do. For which one of them are you going to kill me with stones?”


## John 10:33 (id: 1043010033)

33The Jewish leaders replied, “We do not want to kill you with stones because you did a good deed. Rather, {we want to kill you} because you blaspheme God by claiming to be God even though you are just a man!”


## John 10:34 (id: 1043010034)

34Jesus replied to them, “In the Old Testament a prophet wrote that God said, ‘I have said that you are gods.’


## John 10:35 (id: 1043010035)

35Since God called those to whom he spoke ‘gods’ and no one can prove that the Scripture is false,


## John 10:36 (id: 1043010036)

36why do you say that I am blaspheming God because I said that I am the Son of God? I am the one whom my Father specially selected {to belong to him} and sent into this world.


## John 10:37 (id: 1043010037)

37If I am not doing the miraculous works that my Father wants me to do, then you should not trust me.


## John 10:38 (id: 1043010038)

38However, because I am doing these {miraculous} deeds, you should trust {what} these deeds {reveal about me} even though you do not trust me. {You should do that} in order to learn and comprehend that my Father and I are completely united.”


## John 10:39 (id: 1043010039)

39Because {he said these things}, the Jewish leaders tried again to arrest Jesus, but he got away from them.


## John 10:40 (id: 1043010040)

40Then Jesus went back over {on the east side of} the Jordan River. He went to the place where John the Baptizer had baptized people at the beginning {of his ministry}. Jesus stayed there for a while.


## John 10:41 (id: 1043010041)

41Many people came to Jesus there. They said, “John the Baptizer never performed a miraculous sign, but everything that John said about this man is true!”


## John 10:42 (id: 1043010042)

42Many people trusted in him in that place.


## John 11:1 (id: 1043011001)

1A man named Lazarus became very ill. He lived in the village of Bethany where his sisters Mary and Martha also lived.


## John 11:2 (id: 1043011002)

2This is the same Mary who later would pour perfume on the Lord and would wipe {the oil off of} his feet with her hair. It was her brother Lazarus who was ill.


## John 11:3 (id: 1043011003)

3So the two sisters sent someone to tell Jesus about Lazarus. They said, “Lord, the one whom you love is very ill. {Please come!}”


## John 11:4 (id: 1043011004)

4When Jesus heard about Lazarus’ illness, he said, “This illness will not end in Lazarus’ death. Rather, the purpose of this illness is to reveal how great God is. Lazarus became ill in order that the illness may reveal how great I, the Son of God, am.”


## John 11:5 (id: 1043011005)

5(Jesus loved Martha, her sister Mary, and Lazarus.)


## John 11:6 (id: 1043011006)

6So when Jesus heard that Lazarus was ill, he deliberately remained where he was for two more days.


## John 11:7 (id: 1043011007)

7Then after {those two days} Jesus said to his disciples, “Let us go back to the region of Judea.”


## John 11:8 (id: 1043011008)

8His disciples said, “Teacher, the Jewish leaders {in Judea} currently want to kill you with stones! You surely should not return there again!”


## John 11:9 (id: 1043011009)

9Jesus replied, “You know that there are 12 hours of daylight. The person who walks during the daytime will walk safely because the light allows him to see where he is going.


## John 11:10 (id: 1043011010)

10However, when a person walks during the night, he will stumble because there is no light to allow him to see where he is going.”


## John 11:11 (id: 1043011011)

11After saying these things, he told them, “Our friend Lazarus is sleeping, but I will go there to wake him up.”


## John 11:12 (id: 1043011012)

12So his disciples told him, “Lord, if he is sleeping, then he will get well.”


## John 11:13 (id: 1043011013)

13(Jesus was actually speaking about Lazarus’ death, but his disciples thought that he was talking about actual sleep.)


## John 11:14 (id: 1043011014)

14So Jesus told them clearly, “Lazarus is dead.


## John 11:15 (id: 1043011015)

15And I rejoice that I was not there {when he died}. {I let this happen} so that you may trust in me. {This is} for your benefit. Rather than staying here, let us go to where he is.”


## John 11:16 (id: 1043011016)

16So Thomas, whom they called ‘The Twin,’ said to the rest of the disciples, “Let us also go with the Teacher in order that we may die with him.”


## John 11:17 (id: 1043011017)

17So when Jesus arrived {in the village of Bethany,} he learned that people had already put Lazarus’ dead body in a tomb four days before then.


## John 11:18 (id: 1043011018)

18(Jerusalem was only about three kilometers away from the village of Bethany.)


## John 11:19 (id: 1043011019)

19Many Jewish people came to Martha and Mary {in Bethany} in order to console both of them concerning their brother Lazarus’ death.


## John 11:20 (id: 1043011020)

20When Martha heard {someone say} that Jesus was coming, she went out to meet him. Mary {did not go with her} but stayed in the house.


## John 11:21 (id: 1043011021)

21When Martha met Jesus, she said to him, “Lord, if you had only been here sooner, my brother would not be dead!


## John 11:22 (id: 1043011022)

22However, even now {that he is dead} I am certain that God will do for you whatever you ask him to do.”


## John 11:23 (id: 1043011023)

23Jesus told her, “Your brother will live again.”


## John 11:24 (id: 1043011024)

24Martha told him, “I am certain that my brother will live again when God raises all dead people on the last day {when he judges everyone}.”


## John 11:25 (id: 1043011025)

25Jesus told her, “I am the one who causes dead people to live again. I am the one who gives people eternal life. Whoever trusts in me will live forever, even if his body dies.


## John 11:26 (id: 1043011026)

26All those who receive eternal life and trust in me will surely live forever. Do you believe that this is true?”


## John 11:27 (id: 1043011027)

27Martha told him, “Yes, I do, Lord! I do indeed believe that you are the Messiah, the Son of God. {You are} the one whom God promised would come into this world.”


## John 11:28 (id: 1043011028)

28After she said that, she returned {to the house} and secretly summoned her sister Mary. She told Mary, “The Teacher has arrived, and he is summoning you.”


## John 11:29 (id: 1043011029)

29When Mary heard what her sister said, she rose quickly and went out to meet Jesus.


## John 11:30 (id: 1043011030)

30(At that time Jesus had not yet entered the village of Bethany. Rather, he was still at the place where Martha had met him.)


## John 11:31 (id: 1043011031)

31The Jewish people who were comforting Mary in her house saw her rise quickly and go outside, so they followed her. They thought that she was going to the tomb {where they had buried Lazarus} in order to grieve there.


## John 11:32 (id: 1043011032)

32When Mary arrived at the place where Jesus had spoken to Martha and saw him, she threw herself down on the ground in front of his feet. She told him, “Lord, if you had only been here sooner, my brother would not be dead!”


## John 11:33 (id: 1043011033)

33When Jesus saw her grieving, and the Jewish people with her also grieving, he became extremely agitated.


## John 11:34 (id: 1043011034)

34He asked, “Where have you buried his body?” They told him, “Lord, come and see {where he is}.”


## John 11:35 (id: 1043011035)

35Jesus started crying.


## John 11:36 (id: 1043011036)

36So the Jewish people {who were with Mary} said among themselves, “See how much he loved Lazarus!”


## John 11:37 (id: 1043011037)

37However, others among them said, “He could enable the blind man to see. But maybe he didn’t have enough power to prevent this man from dying!”


## John 11:38 (id: 1043011038)

38Jesus then was emotionally agitated again when he came to the tomb. (It was a cave, and a large rock was covering its entrance.)


## John 11:39 (id: 1043011039)

39Jesus said, “Remove the rock from the cave’s entrance.” {However,} Lazarus’ sister Martha told him, “Lord, by this time his body will smell bad because he died four days ago.”


## John 11:40 (id: 1043011040)

40Jesus told her, “I surely told you that if you trusted me, you would see how great God is!”


## John 11:41 (id: 1043011041)

41So some people removed the rock from the cave’s entrance. Jesus looked up toward heaven and said, “Father, I thank you for listening to me.


## John 11:42 (id: 1043011042)

42I know that you always listen to me. Nevertheless, I said that for the sake of the people standing here. I said this in order that they might be confident that you sent me.”


## John 11:43 (id: 1043011043)

43After he said that prayer, he shouted loudly, “Lazarus, come out of the tomb!”


## John 11:44 (id: 1043011044)

44The man who had died came out of the tomb! {The people who prepared him for burial} had wrapped his feet and hands with strips of cloth and had wrapped a cloth around his face. {So} Jesus told the people standing there, “Take off the strips of cloth that bind him. Allow him to go.”


## John 11:45 (id: 1043011045)

45As a result, many of the Jewish people who had come to comfort Mary and who had witnessed what Jesus had done trusted him.


## John 11:46 (id: 1043011046)

46Nevertheless, some of the people there went to the Pharisees and reported to them what Jesus had done.


## John 11:47 (id: 1043011047)

47So the ruling priests and the Pharisees gathered together the members of the highest Jewish ruling council. They were saying to each other, “What are we going to do about this man? He is performing many miraculous signs.


## John 11:48 (id: 1043011048)

48If we allow him to keep doing these miracles, everyone will trust in him {and make him their king}. Then the Roman army will come and destroy both our temple and our people!”


## John 11:49 (id: 1043011049)

49One member of this council was Caiaphas. He was the high priest during that year. He told them, “You people know nothing!


## John 11:50 (id: 1043011050)

50You do not realize that it would be much better for you to have one man die on behalf of the people than let the Romans kill all of the Jewish people.”


## John 11:51 (id: 1043011051)

51(Caiaphas did not say this because he thought of it himself. Rather, since he was the high priest that year, he was prophesying that Jesus would die on behalf of the Jewish people.


## John 11:52 (id: 1043011052)

52{He was also prophesying that Jesus would die,} not only for the Jewish people, but also in order to gather into one people all the children of God whom God has dispersed throughout the world.)


## John 11:53 (id: 1043011053)

53So in the days following the day that Caiaphas prophesied, the Jewish council made plans to kill Jesus.


## John 11:54 (id: 1043011054)

54Because of that, Jesus no longer traveled around publicly among his Jewish opponents. Instead, he left Jerusalem and went to a town called Ephraim that is in the region near the desolate area. He remained there with his disciples {for a while}.


## John 11:55 (id: 1043011055)

55At that time the Jewish Passover celebration was about to take place. Many people went up to Jerusalem from the region. They came before the Passover celebration began in order to clean themselves {according to the Jewish rules for attending the celebration}.


## John 11:56 (id: 1043011056)

56The people {who came to Jerusalem for the Passover celebration} were searching for Jesus. While they were standing in the temple {courtyard}, they asked each other, “What do you think? He will surely not come to the Passover celebration!”


## John 11:57 (id: 1043011057)

57{Some time earlier} the Jewish ruling priests and the Pharisees had made a command that anyone who found out where Jesus was must report his location to them so that they could arrest him.


## John 12:1 (id: 1043012001)

1Jesus arrived in the village of Bethany six days before the Jewish Passover celebration began. {Bethany was the village} where Lazarus dwelled. He was the man whom Jesus made alive again after he had died.


## John 12:2 (id: 1043012002)

2There in Bethany, some of Jesus’ friends gave a dinner to honor Jesus. Martha served the food to the guests, and Lazarus was among those who were sitting together and eating with Jesus.


## John 12:3 (id: 1043012003)

3Mary then took a bottle that contained about half a liter of very expensive perfume, which was pure oil from nard plants, and she poured it out on Jesus’ feet and then wiped his feet with her hair. The pleasant scent of the perfume filled the entire house.


## John 12:4 (id: 1043012004)

4However, Judas Iscariot {objected}. (He was the one among Jesus’ disciples who would soon help the Jewish leaders arrest Jesus.) He said,


## John 12:5 (id: 1043012005)

5“We should have sold this perfume for the money that a man can earn in 300 days of work. Then we could have given that money to poor people!”


## John 12:6 (id: 1043012006)

6(Judas did not say this because he cared about poor people. Rather, {he said this} because he was a thief. He kept charge of the bag that held their money, but he would steal the money that people gave him to put in the bag.)


## John 12:7 (id: 1043012007)

7So Jesus said, “Leave her alone! She saved the perfume in order to keep it to prepare me for the time when I {die and} am buried.


## John 12:8 (id: 1043012008)

8{She did the right thing} because poor people will always be among you {whom you can help}, but I will not be with you much longer.”


## John 12:9 (id: 1043012009)

9A large crowd of Jews heard that Jesus was {in Bethany}, so they went there. {They came} not only because Jesus was there, but also because they wanted to see Lazarus. He was the man whom Jesus made alive again after he had died.


## John 12:10 (id: 1043012010)

10By contrast, the ruling priests made plans to kill Lazarus as well as Jesus.


## John 12:11 (id: 1043012011)

11{The ruling priests wanted to kill Lazarus} because he was the reason why many of the Jews were no longer believing what they were teaching and were trusting in Jesus instead.


## John 12:12 (id: 1043012012)

12The next day the large crowd of people that had come {to Jerusalem} to {celebrate} the Passover celebration found out that Jesus was on his way there.


## John 12:13 (id: 1043012013)

13So they cut branches off of palm trees and went out to the road to welcome him {as he came into the city}. They were shouting, “Please, save us! May God bless the one who comes with his authority. That one is the King of Israel!”


## John 12:14 (id: 1043012014)

14When Jesus came near to Jerusalem, he found a young donkey and sat on it {in order to ride it into the city}. {By doing this,} he fulfilled what some prophets had written in Scripture:


## John 12:15 (id: 1043012015)

15“Do not be afraid, you who live in Jerusalem. Look! Your King is coming. He is riding on a donkey’s colt!”


## John 12:16 (id: 1043012016)

16When these events happened, his disciples did not understand that they were a fulfillment of what those prophets had written. However, after God glorified Jesus {by bringing him back to life}, they remembered what the prophets had written about him and that people had done those things to him.


## John 12:17 (id: 1043012017)

17The crowd of people that was following along with Jesus kept telling others that they had seen Jesus summon Lazarus to come out of the tomb and had seen Jesus make him alive again after he had died.


## John 12:18 (id: 1043012018)

18A different crowd of people went out of the city gate to meet Jesus. {They did so} because they heard that he had done the miraculous sign of {making Lazarus alive again}.


## John 12:19 (id: 1043012019)

19So the Pharisees said to each other, “See! We are failing to stop him. Look! Everyone is becoming his disciples!”


## John 12:20 (id: 1043012020)

20Some people who were not Jews were among the people who went up {to Jerusalem} in order to worship God during the Passover celebration.


## John 12:21 (id: 1043012021)

21They came to Philip, who was from the city of Bethsaida, which is in the region of Galilee. They asked him, “Sir, would you introduce us to Jesus?”


## John 12:22 (id: 1043012022)

22Then Philip reported this to Andrew, and they both went and told Jesus {about the Greeks}.


## John 12:23 (id: 1043012023)

23Jesus answered Philip and Andrew, “It is now the time for God to show everyone how great I, the Son of Man, am.


## John 12:24 (id: 1043012024)

24I am telling you the truth: {My life is like a seed.} Unless a seed of wheat is planted in the ground and dies, it will only be one seed. But if it dies in the ground, then it will grow and produce much wheat.


## John 12:25 (id: 1043012025)

25Anyone who wants to keep on living more than {be my disciple} will die, but anyone who wants to {be my disciple} more than to keep on living in this sinful world will keep his life forever.


## John 12:26 (id: 1043012026)

26Anyone who wants to serve me must be my disciple. My servant will be with me {in heaven}. My Father will honor anyone who serves me.


## John 12:27 (id: 1043012027)

27At this moment I feel greatly distressed. I should surely not say, ‘Father, prevent me from experiencing this time {when I will suffer and die!}’ No, {I will not do that,} because this is the very reason I have lived up to this time {when I will suffer and die}.


## John 12:28 (id: 1043012028)

28Father, show how great you are!” Then God spoke from heaven, “I have already shown how great I am; I will do it again!”


## John 12:29 (id: 1043012029)

29The crowd of people that was standing there heard the voice of God as well. Some of them said it was just the sound of thunder. Some other people said that an angel had spoken to Jesus.


## John 12:30 (id: 1043012030)

30Jesus replied to them, “The voice that you heard was God’s voice. {He did not speak} for my benefit, but for yours!


## John 12:31 (id: 1043012031)

31Now is the time for God to judge the people in this world. Now is the time when he will throw out {Satan, who is} the one who rules this world.


## John 12:32 (id: 1043012032)

32As for me, when people raise me high {on a cross}, I will cause all peoples to come to me.”


## John 12:33 (id: 1043012033)

33(He said this to let the people know the way he would soon die.)


## John 12:34 (id: 1043012034)

34The crowd of people then replied to him, “We have learned from Scripture that the Messiah will live forever. So why do you say that the Son of Man will be lifted up {to die on a cross}? Who is this ‘Son of Man’ you are speaking about?”


## John 12:35 (id: 1043012035)

35Jesus told them, “I am the light {that reveals God’s truth and goodness}. I will be with you only a little longer. Live according to my example while I am still here in order to prevent the darkness {that is sin and evil} from controlling you. Those who live sinfully are like people who wander around in darkness, not knowing where they are going!


## John 12:36 (id: 1043012036)

36Trust in me, the light {that reveals God’s truth and goodness}, while I am still with you. {Do this} in order to be God’s people, {those who know his truth and goodness}.” After he said those things, Jesus left them and hid himself from the people.


## John 12:37 (id: 1043012037)

37Even though Jesus had done many miraculous signs in front of the people, most of them did not trust in him.


## John 12:38 (id: 1043012038)

38Their unbelief happened in order to make come true what Isaiah the prophet had written {long ago}: “Lord, no one has believed what we said! {It seems like} no one has seen the power that the Lord has revealed!”


## John 12:39 (id: 1043012039)

39They could not trust in Jesus for this reason: Isaiah had also written,


## John 12:40 (id: 1043012040)

40“The Lord has made them unable to perceive what they see, and he has made them stubborn. {He has done this} in order that they would not perceive what they see, and would not truly understand, and would not turn away from sin to God, and I would not forgive them.”


## John 12:41 (id: 1043012041)

41Isaiah wrote that {long ago}, because he saw how great Jesus is and spoke concerning him.


## John 12:42 (id: 1043012042)

42Although this was true, many members of the highest Jewish governing council trusted in Jesus. Nevertheless, they did not tell others {that they trusted in Jesus}, because they feared that the Pharisees would ban them from entering the Jewish meeting place.


## John 12:43 (id: 1043012043)

43{They feared this} because they preferred that other people honor them rather than that God would honor them.


## John 12:44 (id: 1043012044)

44Jesus spoke loudly {to a crowd of people}, “Those who trust me are not only trusting me but also {are trusting my Father}, who sent me.


## John 12:45 (id: 1043012045)

45Those who see me are also seeing my Father, who sent me.


## John 12:46 (id: 1043012046)

46I came into this world as the light {that reveals God’s truth and goodness} to everyone in the world in order that anyone who trusts in me will not stay in the darkness {that is sin and evil}.


## John 12:47 (id: 1043012047)

47I do not condemn anyone who listens to my teachings but refuses to obey them, because I did not come into this world in order to condemn the people in the world. Rather, I came into this world in order to save them {from being punished for their sins}.


## John 12:48 (id: 1043012048)

48Anyone who rejects me and does not accept {and obey} my teachings will be condemned according to the very teachings I have spoken. On the last day {when God judges everyone,} God will judge that person on the basis of my teachings.


## John 12:49 (id: 1043012049)

49{This will happen} because I did not speak on my own authority. Rather, my Father himself, who sent me, commanded me regarding what I should say and how I should say it.


## John 12:50 (id: 1043012050)

50I am certain that what my Father has commanded me to say is what people must believe in order to live forever {in heaven}. So I say exactly what my Father has told me to say.”


## John 13:1 (id: 1043013001)

1On the day before the Passover celebration would begin, Jesus knew that it was the time for him to leave this world and to return to his Father. He always loved his disciples who were with him in this world, and he loved them to the uttermost.


## John 13:2 (id: 1043013002)

2When Jesus and his disciples were having their evening meal, the devil had already caused Judas, Simon Iscariot’s son, to think that he should help the Jewish leaders arrest Jesus.


## John 13:3 (id: 1043013003)

3Jesus knew that his Father had given him complete power and authority over everything, and he also knew that he came from God and would soon return to God.


## John 13:4 (id: 1043013004)

4{Because he knew those things,} Jesus got up from the table where they were eating the evening meal, took off his outer clothing, and wrapped a towel around his waist.


## John 13:5 (id: 1043013005)

5He poured some water into a large bowl and started washing his disciples’ feet and wiping them dry with the towel that he had wrapped around his waist.


## John 13:6 (id: 1043013006)

6When he came to Simon Peter {to wash his feet}, Peter told him, “Lord, you should not wash my feet!”


## John 13:7 (id: 1043013007)

7Jesus replied to him, “Right now you do not understand what I am doing, but later you will understand.”


## John 13:8 (id: 1043013008)

8Peter said, “You will surely never wash my feet!” Jesus replied to him, “If I do not wash you, then you will not inherit God’s blessings with me.”


## John 13:9 (id: 1043013009)

9Simon Peter told him, “Lord, do not wash my feet only! Wash my hands and my head also!”


## John 13:10 (id: 1043013010)

10Jesus told him, “Anyone whom someone has washed only needs to wash his feet. The rest of his body is clean. You disciples are clean, but not all {of you are clean}.”


## John 13:11 (id: 1043013011)

11({Jesus said this about being spiritually clean,} because he knew who was going to help the Jewish leaders arrest him. That is the reason he said, “Not all of you are clean.”)


## John 13:12 (id: 1043013012)

12After he finished washing their feet, he put his outer clothing on again. Then he sat down at the table again and told them, “You must understand what I have just done for you!


## John 13:13 (id: 1043013013)

13You rightly call me ‘Teacher’ and ‘Lord,’ because that is what I am.


## John 13:14 (id: 1043013014)

14Since I, your teacher and Lord, have {humbly served you by} washing your feet, you also should {humbly serve each other by} washing each other’s feet.


## John 13:15 (id: 1043013015)

15{By washing your feet} I have given you an example to follow in order that you should {humbly serve each other} as I have {humbly} served you.


## John 13:16 (id: 1043013016)

16I am telling you the truth: Just as a servant is not more important than his master, nor is a messenger more important than the person who has sent him, {you are not more important than me}.


## John 13:17 (id: 1043013017)

17Since you now know {that you should humbly serve each other}, God will bless you if you do so.


## John 13:18 (id: 1043013018)

18I am not saying that all of you will be blessed. I know well the people whom I have chosen {to be my disciples}. However, what is about to happen must take place in order that what a prophet wrote in scripture can come true: ‘The one who shared a meal with me as a friend has opposed me.’


## John 13:19 (id: 1043013019)

19From now on I am telling you what will happen before it happens in order that, when it does happen, you may trust that I am {God}.


## John 13:20 (id: 1043013020)

20I am telling you the truth: Whoever accepts the one I send out also accepts me; and whoever accepts me also accepts my Father who sent me.”


## John 13:21 (id: 1043013021)

21After Jesus said this, he felt disturbed. He solemnly declared, “I am telling you the truth: One of you is going to give me up {to my opponents}.”


## John 13:22 (id: 1043013022)

22His disciples kept looking at one another and wondering who among them he was talking about.


## John 13:23 (id: 1043013023)

23One of his disciples, {John} whom Jesus loved, was sitting at the table beside Jesus.


## John 13:24 (id: 1043013024)

24Simon Peter made a gesture to him to indicate that he should ask Jesus which disciple he was talking about.


## John 13:25 (id: 1043013025)

25So John leaned back against Jesus and {quietly} asked him, “Lord, who is the one who will betray you?”


## John 13:26 (id: 1043013026)

26Jesus replied, “It is the man to whom I will give this piece of bread after I dip it in the bowl.” Then he dipped the bread in the bowl and gave it to Judas, Simon Iscariot’s son.


## John 13:27 (id: 1043013027)

27As soon as Judas took the piece of bread from Jesus, Satan took control of him. Jesus then told him, “Do quickly what you have planned to do.”


## John 13:28 (id: 1043013028)

28(No one else among those sitting at the table knew why Jesus had said that to Judas.


## John 13:29 (id: 1043013029)

29Some of them thought that Jesus was telling him to go and buy some things that they needed for the Passover celebration or to give some money to the poor. {They thought this} because Judas had the bag that held their money.)


## John 13:30 (id: 1043013030)

30So after Judas took the bread from Jesus, he immediately went out. (It was night.)


## John 13:31 (id: 1043013031)

31So after Judas left, Jesus said, “Now God has shown people how great I, the Son of Man, am. I have also shown people how great God is.


## John 13:32 (id: 1043013032)

32God himself will show {people} how great I, the Son of Man, am, and he will do this right away.


## John 13:33 (id: 1043013033)

33{You whom I love as though you were my} children, I will be with you only a little while longer. Then you will look for me, but it will be just like I told the Jewish leaders and am telling you now: You will not be able to come to the place where I am going.


## John 13:34 (id: 1043013034)

34I now give you this new command in order that you might love each other: You must love each other in the same way that I have loved you.


## John 13:35 (id: 1043013035)

35If you love each other, everyone {who sees that love} will know that you are my disciples.”


## John 13:36 (id: 1043013036)

36Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, where are you going?” Jesus replied, “You cannot go with me now to the place where I am going, but you will go there later.”


## John 13:37 (id: 1043013037)

37Peter told him, “Lord, why can’t I go with you now? I am willing to die for you!”


## John 13:38 (id: 1043013038)

38Jesus replied, “You are not really willing to die for me! I am telling you the truth: You will surely say three times that you do not know me before the rooster crows {in the morning}!”


## John 14:1 (id: 1043014001)

1“Do not be distressed. Trust God. Trust me as well.


## John 14:2 (id: 1043014002)

2There are many places for people to dwell where my Father dwells. If that were not true, I would have told you so, because I will go there to prepare a place for you to dwell.


## John 14:3 (id: 1043014003)

3And after I go there to prepare a place for you to dwell, I will return and take you to be with me, in order for you also to be with me where I am.


## John 14:4 (id: 1043014004)

4You know how to go to the place where I am going.”


## John 14:5 (id: 1043014005)

5Thomas said to him, “Lord, we have no idea where you are going! We cannot possibly know how to go there!”


## John 14:6 (id: 1043014006)

6Jesus told him, “I am how people can go there. I am the one who reveals what is true about God, and the one who gives eternal life to people. The only way people can come to my Father is by trusting me.


## John 14:7 (id: 1043014007)

7Since you know who I am, you know my Father also. From this time forward, you know him, and it is as though you have seen him.”


## John 14:8 (id: 1043014008)

8Philip said to Jesus, “Lord, let us see the Father and that will satisfy us!”


## John 14:9 (id: 1043014009)

9Jesus said to him, “I have been with you all for such a long time. Surely you know me, Philip! Those who have seen me are like those who have seen my Father. So you have no reason to say ‘Let us see the Father’!


## John 14:10 (id: 1043014010)

10You surely must believe that I and my Father are completely united! I did not speak all that I have spoken to you on my own. Rather, my Father who is united with me is working his own miraculous works through me.


## John 14:11 (id: 1043014011)

11Trust me when I say that I and my Father are completely united! Otherwise, if you are not going to trust what I say, at least trust me on account of all the miraculous works {that you have seen me do}.


## John 14:12 (id: 1043014012)

12I am telling you the truth: Whoever trusts in me will also do the miraculous works that I do. He will do even greater works than those I do, because I am going to my Father.


## John 14:13 (id: 1043014013)

13I will do anything that you request as my representative. I will do this in order that I, his Son, might show how great my Father is.


## John 14:14 (id: 1043014014)

14I will do anything that you request from me as my representative.


## John 14:15 (id: 1043014015)

15If you really love me, you will obey everything that I have commanded you.


## John 14:16 (id: 1043014016)

16Then I will request from my Father, and he will answer me by giving you another one to help you in order for him to be with you forever.


## John 14:17 (id: 1043014017)

17{He is} the Holy Spirit who declares what is true about God. The unbelieving people in the world cannot accept him, because they do not see him or know him. You disciples know this Spirit because he dwells with you, and he will later dwell in you.


## John 14:18 (id: 1043014018)

18I will not leave you without anyone to take care of you. I will soon return to you.


## John 14:19 (id: 1043014019)

19In a little while the unbelievers in the world will not see me anymore, but you yourselves will see me again. Because I will soon live again, you too will live again.


## John 14:20 (id: 1043014020)

20When you see me again, you will know that I am united with my Father and that you and I are completely united.


## John 14:21 (id: 1043014021)

21Whoever knows and obeys what I command truly loves me. And my Father loves whoever loves me. I will love that person too, and I will reveal myself to that person.”


## John 14:22 (id: 1043014022)

22Judas (not Judas Iscariot, {but a different disciple with the same name}) spoke to Jesus. {He said,} “Lord, what has changed to cause you to reveal yourself just to us and not to all the people in the world?”


## John 14:23 (id: 1043014023)

23Jesus replied to him, “Whoever loves me obeys my teaching. My Father will love that person. He and I will come to that person and dwell inside that person.


## John 14:24 (id: 1043014024)

24Whoever does not love me does not obey my teachings. What you have just heard me say I did not say on my own. Rather, {what I have said has come} from my Father, who has sent me.


## John 14:25 (id: 1043014025)

25I have said these things to you while I am still with you.


## John 14:26 (id: 1043014026)

26But my Father will send the Holy Spirit in my place. He is the one who will help you. He will teach you all {of God’s truth that you need to know}. He will also cause you to remember all the things that I have told you.


## John 14:27 (id: 1043014027)

27As I leave you I give you a peaceful feeling. It is my peaceful feeling that I am giving to you. I give to you {a peaceful feeling} in a different manner than the people in the world give it. Do not be distressed or afraid.


## John 14:28 (id: 1043014028)

28You heard me tell you that I am going away and will later return to you. If you really loved me, you would rejoice that I am returning to my Father {in heaven}, because he is superior to me.


## John 14:29 (id: 1043014029)

29I have told you these things now before they happen so that you will continue to trust me when they do happen.


## John 14:30 (id: 1043014030)

30I will not be able to talk with you much longer, because {Satan,} the one who rules this world, is coming. But he has no control over me.


## John 14:31 (id: 1043014031)

31However, this will happen in order for the people in the world to know that I love my Father and I will do exactly what my Father has commanded me to do. Rise, let us leave this place.”


## John 15:1 (id: 1043015001)

1“I am like a genuine vine {that grows fruit}. My Father is like a gardener {who takes care of it}.


## John 15:2 (id: 1043015002)

2My Father cuts off and removes every branch that seems to be part of me but does not produce fruit. As for every branch that produces fruit, he cleans it by pruning it so that it may produce even more fruit.


## John 15:3 (id: 1043015003)

3You are like branches that have already been cleaned by pruning because of the teaching that I have told you before.


## John 15:4 (id: 1043015004)

4Stay united with me, and I will stay united with you. As the branch cannot produce any fruit unless it stays attached to the vine, so you cannot produce spiritual fruit unless you stay united with me.


## John 15:5 (id: 1043015005)

5I am like the vine; you are like the branches. If you stay united with me and I stay united with you, you will produce a lot of fruit. {This is true} because you cannot do anything without my help.


## John 15:6 (id: 1043015006)

6As for anyone who does not stay united with me, that person is like a branch that the gardener cuts off and throws away. After such branches dry up, the gardener’s workers pick them up and throw them into a fire and burn them up.


## John 15:7 (id: 1043015007)

7If you stay united with me and obey what I have taught you, you can request anything from God that you want, and he will grant your request.


## John 15:8 (id: 1043015008)

8You show people how great my Father is by producing a lot of fruit and being my disciples.


## John 15:9 (id: 1043015009)

9I have loved you in the same way that my Father has loved me. Now keep living in a way that is appropriate for those whom I love.


## John 15:10 (id: 1043015010)

10If you obey what I have commanded you, you will be acting in a way that is appropriate for those whom I love, just like I have obeyed what my Father has commanded me, and I act in a way that is appropriate for someone whom he loves.


## John 15:11 (id: 1043015011)

11I told you these things in order that you may be as joyful as I am and {in order that} you may be joyful to the greatest degree.


## John 15:12 (id: 1043015012)

12This is what I am commanding you to do: Love each other in the way that I have loved you.


## John 15:13 (id: 1043015013)

13No one has greater love than a person who is willing to die for his friends.


## John 15:14 (id: 1043015014)

14You are really my friends if you keep doing what I have commanded you to do.


## John 15:15 (id: 1043015015)

15I am not going to call you my servants any longer, because a servant does not understand what his master is doing. I now call you friends, because I have made you understand everything that my Father has told me.


## John 15:16 (id: 1043015016)

16You did not choose {to be my disciples}. Rather, I chose you {to be my disciples} and assigned you {to this role} in order that you would go out and produce spiritual fruit and {in order that} the fruit you produce should last forever. {I also chose you} in order that my Father would give you everything that you request from him as my representatives.


## John 15:17 (id: 1043015017)

17I command you to do these things in order that you would love one another.


## John 15:18 (id: 1043015018)

18Since the people who oppose God in the world detest you, you must realize that they detested me first.


## John 15:19 (id: 1043015019)

19If you were part of the people who oppose God in the world, those unbelievers would love you as they love their own. However, I chose you to come out from among them. The people who oppose God in the world detest you because you are not part of them.


## John 15:20 (id: 1043015020)

20Remember that I told you that a servant is not more important than his master. Since they have caused me to suffer, they will certainly cause you to suffer as well. If any of them have obeyed my teaching, they will also obey what you teach.


## John 15:21 (id: 1043015021)

21Yet the unbelievers in this world will do all these hateful things to you because you represent me {and} because they do not know my Father who has sent me here.


## John 15:22 (id: 1043015022)

22If I had not come and taught them {God’s truth}, they would not have been guilty {of rejecting me and my message}. However, {since I have come and taught them}, now they do not have any excuse for their sin.


## John 15:23 (id: 1043015023)

23Whoever detests me also detests my Father.


## John 15:24 (id: 1043015024)

24If I had not performed miraculous works among them that no one else has ever done, they would not be guilty of sin. Yet, as it is, they have seen these works and detest me. They also detest my Father.


## John 15:25 (id: 1043015025)

25However, this has happened in order that these words that a prophet wrote in their scriptures would come true: ‘They hated me for no reason.’


## John 15:26 (id: 1043015026)

26When I send to you from my Father the one who will help you, he will tell people who I am. He is the Holy Spirit, who declares what is true about God and goes forth from my Father.


## John 15:27 (id: 1043015027)

27You also must tell everyone about me, because you have been with me since the very first days when I began my work.”


## John 16:1 (id: 1043016001)

1I told you about these things that will happen so that you would continue trusting in me {when they do happen}.


## John 16:2 (id: 1043016002)

2The Jews who oppose me will ban you from entering the Jewish meeting places. Yet {something even worse will happen.} The time is coming when all the people who will kill you will think that they are pleasing God by doing so.


## John 16:3 (id: 1043016003)

3They will do such things because they have never known who I really am, nor who my Father is.


## John 16:4 (id: 1043016004)

4I have told you about these things that will happen in order that when they happen, you will remember that I told you they would happen. I did not tell you about them in the very first days when I began my work, because I was with you then.


## John 16:5 (id: 1043016005)

5“Now I am going back to my Father who sent me. Yet now none of you is asking me where I am going!


## John 16:6 (id: 1043016006)

6You are very sad because I have told you these things.


## John 16:7 (id: 1043016007)

7Nevertheless, I now tell you true information: It is better for you that I leave {than that I stay}. {This is true} because if I do not leave, then the one who will help you will not come to you. However, If I go away, then I will send him to you.


## John 16:8 (id: 1043016008)

8When that one who will help comes, he will convict people in the world of the sins {they have committed}. {He will convict them} of not being righteous, and {he will convict} them that God will judge them.


## John 16:9 (id: 1043016009)

9{He will convict people} of their sin, because they have sinned by not trusting in me.


## John 16:10 (id: 1043016010)

10{He will convict people} of not being righteous, because I am going back to my Father, and you will no longer see me {as the example of how to be righteous}.


## John 16:11 (id: 1043016011)

11{He will convict people} that God will judge them, because he has condemned {Satan, who is} the one who rules this world.


## John 16:12 (id: 1043016012)

12I want to tell you many more things. However, if I tell you now, you will not be able to accept them.


## John 16:13 (id: 1043016013)

13When the Holy Spirit, who declares what is true about God, comes, he will enable you to understand all the truth {you need to know}. {He can do so} because he will not speak from his own authority. Rather, he will say whatever he hears from God, and he will tell you ahead of time about things that will happen.


## John 16:14 (id: 1043016014)

14The Holy Spirit will show how great I am by telling you what he has heard from me.


## John 16:15 (id: 1043016015)

15Everything my Father has belongs to me. That is why I said that the Holy Spirit will tell you what he has heard from me.


## John 16:16 (id: 1043016016)

16After a short time you will not see me, and after a short time, you will see me again.”


## John 16:17 (id: 1043016017)

17Some of his disciples then asked one another, “What does Jesus mean when he says to us, ‘After a short time you will not see me, and after a short time, you will see me again’? And {what does he mean when he says}, ‘Because I am going back to my Father’?”


## John 16:18 (id: 1043016018)

18So they kept asking, “What does ‘after a short time’ mean? We do not understand what he is saying.”


## John 16:19 (id: 1043016019)

19Jesus recognized that his disciples wanted to ask him more questions. So he said to them, “You are asking each other what I meant when I said, ‘After a short time you will not see me, and after a short time, you will see me again.’


## John 16:20 (id: 1043016020)

20I am telling you the truth: You will cry and mourn, but the people who oppose God in the world will rejoice. You will be very sad, but you will change from being sad to being joyful.


## John 16:21 (id: 1043016021)

21A woman experiences pain when she gives birth to a child, because it is the time for her to give birth. Yet she forgets that she suffered after she has given birth to the child, because she is joyful about the fact that she has brought a human being into the world.


## John 16:22 (id: 1043016022)

22In the same way, although you are sad at this time, I will see you again, and you will rejoice, and no one will stop you from rejoicing.


## John 16:23 (id: 1043016023)

23When you see me again, you will not ask me anything. I am telling you the truth: My Father will give you whatever you request from him as my representatives.


## John 16:24 (id: 1043016024)

24Up to now you have not requested anything {from my Father} as my representatives. Request {anything from my Father} and you will receive {whatever you request}. God will give it to you in order that you may be joyful to the greatest degree.


## John 16:25 (id: 1043016025)

25I have told you these things using figurative language, but there will soon be a time when I will not use that kind of language to speak with you anymore. Rather, I will tell you about my Father using language that you can easily understand.


## John 16:26 (id: 1043016026)

26When you see me again, you will request {anything from God} as my representatives, and I will not have to ask my Father on your behalf,


## John 16:27 (id: 1043016027)

27because my Father himself loves you because you love me and trust that I came here from God.


## John 16:28 (id: 1043016028)

28I came from my Father and entered this world. Again I tell you that I will leave this world and go back to my Father.”


## John 16:29 (id: 1043016029)

29His disciples responded, “Finally! Now you are using language that we can easily understand and not using figurative language.


## John 16:30 (id: 1043016030)

30Now we understand that you know everything. There is no need for anyone to ask you questions {because you already know what that person will ask}. This is why we trust that you came here from God.”


## John 16:31 (id: 1043016031)

31Jesus replied to them, “Now you finally trust me!


## John 16:32 (id: 1043016032)

32Look! There will soon be a time, and that time will be very soon, when others will scatter you everywhere. Each of you will go to his own home, and you will leave me by myself. However, I will not be by myself, because my Father is always with me.


## John 16:33 (id: 1043016033)

33I have told you all these things that will happen in order that you may feel peaceful {because you are united} with me. In this world you will be afflicted, but be brave! I have defeated the people who oppose God in the world!”


## John 17:1 (id: 1043017001)

1After Jesus told his disciples about these things that would happen, he looked up toward heaven and said, “Father, it is now time {for me to suffer and die}. Show everyone how great I, your Son, am in order that I may show everyone how great you are.


## John 17:2 (id: 1043017002)

2{Please do this} because you gave me authority over all people in order that I might enable all those whom you chose to come to me to live forever {with me in heaven}.


## John 17:3 (id: 1043017003)

3This is what it means to live forever: to know you, who are the only real God, and to know me, Jesus the Messiah, the one whom you have sent into the world.


## John 17:4 (id: 1043017004)

4I have shown everyone how great you are while I have been on the earth. {I did this} by finishing the work that you assigned me to do.


## John 17:5 (id: 1043017005)

5Father, at this time show how great I am in your presence with the same greatness that I had in your presence before the time we created the world.


## John 17:6 (id: 1043017006)

6I have shown who you really are to the men whom you have given me from among the people in the world. They belonged to you and you have given them to me. They have obeyed your teaching.


## John 17:7 (id: 1043017007)

7At this time they know that everything you have given me has come from you.


## John 17:8 (id: 1043017008)

8{They know this} because I have told them the teachings that you told me. They themselves accepted those teachings, and they are certain that I came from you, and they believe that you sent me here.


## John 17:9 (id: 1043017009)

9I am praying for them. I am not praying for the people who oppose you in the world. Rather, {I am praying} for those people whom you gave me, because they belong to you.


## John 17:10 (id: 1043017010)

10All the disciples that are mine belong to you, and {all the disciples} that belong to you are mine. They show everyone how great I am.


## John 17:11 (id: 1043017011)

11I will not stay in this sinful world any longer. However, my disciples are staying in it. I will soon return to you. My Father, who is set apart, keep them safe by your same power that you gave to me, in order that they may be united in the same way that we are united.


## John 17:12 (id: 1043017012)

12During the time that I have been with them, I have kept them safe by your same power that you gave to me. I have guarded them, and only one of them will be eternally ruined. {He is} the one whom you had destined to be eternally ruined in order that the scriptures would come true.


## John 17:13 (id: 1043017013)

13At this time I am about to return to you. I have said these things while I am in this sinful world in order that I may give them my complete joy.


## John 17:14 (id: 1043017014)

14I have told them your teaching. {Thus the people who oppose you in} the world have detested them because, like me, they do not belong to those who oppose you.


## John 17:15 (id: 1043017015)

15I am not requesting that you take my disciples out of this sinful world. Rather, {I am requesting} that you keep them safe from being harmed by Satan, the evil one.


## John 17:16 (id: 1043017016)

16Like me, they do not belong to the people who oppose you in the world.


## John 17:17 (id: 1043017017)

17Set my disciples apart to serve you by {enabling them to know and live according to} what is true. Your teaching is what is true.


## John 17:18 (id: 1043017018)

18I am sending them among the people in the world in the same way that you sent me among them.


## John 17:19 (id: 1043017019)

19I set myself apart as a sacrifice on their behalf in order that they also may set themselves apart to serve you by {knowing and living according to} what is true.”


## John 17:20 (id: 1043017020)

20Now I am praying not only for these disciples here, but {I am praying} also for those people who will trust in me by means of what my disciples say.


## John 17:21 (id: 1043017021)

21{I pray} that they may all be united in the same way that you, my Father, and I are completely united. {I pray} that they may also be united to us in order that the people in the world might know that you sent me here.


## John 17:22 (id: 1043017022)

22In order that they may be united in the same way that we are united, I have honored the people who trust in me just like you honored me.


## John 17:23 (id: 1043017023)

23{This means that} I am united with them, and you are united with me. {I have done this} in order that they may be completely united together in order that the people in the world may know that you sent me here and that you love the people who trust in me in the same way that you love me.


## John 17:24 (id: 1043017024)

24“My Father, I want these people whom you have given to me to be with me where I will be in heaven in order that they can see how glorious I am. You made me glorious because you have loved me from before the time when we created the universe.


## John 17:25 (id: 1043017025)

25My Father, who always does what is right, the people who oppose you in the world do not know who you are, but I know who you are. These people who trust me know that you have sent me here.


## John 17:26 (id: 1043017026)

26I have made them know who you are. I will continue to do so in order that they may love others like you love me and in order that I may be united with them.”


## John 18:1 (id: 1043018001)

1After Jesus finished praying, he left with his disciples and crossed the Kidron Valley. On the other side of the valley they entered into a grove {of olive trees}.


## John 18:2 (id: 1043018002)

2Judas is the one who was about to help Jesus’ opponents arrest him. He knew the place where Jesus was because Jesus often went there with his disciples.


## John 18:3 (id: 1043018003)

3So Judas brought to that grove a group of Roman soldiers and some temple guards who had been sent by the ruling priests and Pharisees. They were carrying torches, lamps, and weapons.


## John 18:4 (id: 1043018004)

4Because Jesus knew what was going to happen to him, he went forward and asked the soldiers and temple guards, “Who are you looking for?”


## John 18:5 (id: 1043018005)

5They replied to him, “Jesus from Nazareth.” Jesus told them, “I am {that person}.” (Judas was standing with them. He was the one who was helping Jesus’ opponents arrest him.)


## John 18:6 (id: 1043018006)

6When Jesus told them, “I am {that person},” they stepped back and involuntarily fell down to the ground.


## John 18:7 (id: 1043018007)

7Jesus then asked them again, “Who are you looking for?” They answered, “Jesus from Nazareth.”


## John 18:8 (id: 1043018008)

8Jesus replied, “I told you that I am {that person}. Since I am the one whom you are looking for, let these other men go.”


## John 18:9 (id: 1043018009)

9(This happened in order that these words that he had said to his Father would come true: “I did not lose even one of those whom you gave me.”)


## John 18:10 (id: 1043018010)

10Simon Peter had a short sword. He took it out of its sheath and struck the high priest’s servant with it, cutting off his right ear. Malchus was that servant’s name.


## John 18:11 (id: 1043018011)

11Jesus then told Peter, “Put your short sword back into its sheath! I must surely suffer in the way that my Father has planned for me {to suffer}!”


## John 18:12 (id: 1043018012)

12The group of Roman soldiers, along with their leader and some of the temple guards from the Jewish leaders, seized Jesus and tied his hands.


## John 18:13 (id: 1043018013)

13Then they took him to Annas first, because he was Caiaphas’s father\-in\-law, and Caiaphas was the high priest that year.


## John 18:14 (id: 1043018014)

14(It was Caiaphas who had advised the other Jewish leaders that it would be much better to have one man die on behalf of the people {than to let the Romans kill them}.)


## John 18:15 (id: 1043018015)

15Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did one other disciple. Annas the high priest knew the other disciple, so he was allowed to enter the high priest’s courtyard {when the soldiers and guards took} Jesus there.


## John 18:16 (id: 1043018016)

16However, Peter had to stay outside at the door. Therefore, that disciple who knew the high priest went out again and spoke to the servant girl who was watching the door. Then he was allowed to bring Peter into {the courtyard}.


## John 18:17 (id: 1043018017)

17That servant girl who was watching the door then told Peter, “You are surely one of the disciples of the man {whom they have arrested}!” He replied, “No, I am not!”


## John 18:18 (id: 1043018018)

18(It was cold, so the high priest’s servants and the temple guards made a fire and were standing and warming themselves around it. Peter was also standing and warming himself there with them.)


## John 18:19 (id: 1043018019)

19The high priest then questioned Jesus about his disciples and what he had been teaching them.


## John 18:20 (id: 1043018020)

20Jesus replied to him, “I have spoken in public to everyone {who would listen}. I have always taught in the Jewish meeting places and in the temple. {I have taught in the places} where many Jews gather. I have never said anything secretly.


## John 18:21 (id: 1043018021)

21You should not ask me! Ask the people who heard what I taught them. They certainly know what I said.”


## John 18:22 (id: 1043018022)

22After Jesus said this, one of the temple guards who was standing near him slapped him. He said, “You should not answer the high priest like that!”


## John 18:23 (id: 1043018023)

23Jesus replied to him, “If what I said was wrong, tell me what it was. However, if what I said was right, you should not slap me.”


## John 18:24 (id: 1043018024)

24Then Annas sent Jesus to Caiaphas, the other high priest, while his hands were still tied.


## John 18:25 (id: 1043018025)

25Meanwhile, Simon Peter was still standing and warming himself {in the courtyard}, when someone said to him, “You are surely also one of the disciples of this man whom they have arrested!” Peter denied this and said, “No, I am not!”


## John 18:26 (id: 1043018026)

26One of the high priest’s servants was a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off. He said to Peter, “Surely I saw you in the {olive tree} grove with the man whom they have arrested!”


## John 18:27 (id: 1043018027)

27Peter then again denied {that he had been with Jesus}. A rooster crowed immediately {after he did that}.


## John 18:28 (id: 1043018028)

28The Jewish leaders then brought Jesus from Caiaphas’ house to the headquarters of Pilate, the Roman governor. (It was early morning. The Jewish leaders did not enter Pilate’s headquarters {because Pilate was not a Jew. If they entered a non\-Jew’s home, they thought} they would defile themselves and be unable to eat the Passover celebration meal.)


## John 18:29 (id: 1043018029)

29So Pilate came out to talk to them. He asked them, “What are you accusing this man of doing?”


## John 18:30 (id: 1043018030)

30The Jewish leaders replied, “If this man were not a criminal, we would not have brought him to you!”


## John 18:31 (id: 1043018031)

31So Pilate told them, “You yourselves take him and judge him by your own law.” The Jewish leaders replied, “We want to execute him, but your Roman law prevents us from doing that.”


## John 18:32 (id: 1043018032)

32(This happened in order that what Jesus had said about how he would soon die would come true.)


## John 18:33 (id: 1043018033)

33Pilate then went back inside his headquarters. He commanded soldiers to bring Jesus to him, and he asked him, “Are you the King of the Jews?”


## John 18:34 (id: 1043018034)

34Jesus replied, “Are you asking me this question because you thought of it yourself, or did others tell you this concerning me?”


## John 18:35 (id: 1043018035)

35Pilate replied, “I am not a Jew! Your own countrymen and the ruling priests brought you to me. What wrong have you done?”


## John 18:36 (id: 1043018036)

36Jesus replied, “The kingdom that I rule over does not belong to this sinful world. If it did, my servants would have fought in order to prevent the Jewish leaders from arresting me. But, as it is, the kingdom that I rule over does not belong to this sinful world.”


## John 18:37 (id: 1043018037)

37Then Pilate asked him, “So you are a king?” Jesus replied, “You yourself say so. This is why I was born into this world: I came in order to tell people what is true about God. Everyone who believes what is true about God accepts and obeys what I say.”


## John 18:38 (id: 1043018038)

38Pilate said to him, “Nobody knows what is really true!” After Pilate said that, he went outside and talked to the Jewish leaders again. He told them, “I have found no evidence that this man has broken a law.


## John 18:39 (id: 1043018039)

39However, you Jews have a custom: Every year during the Passover celebration you ask me, and I release to you someone who is in prison. So do you want me to release your king to you?”


## John 18:40 (id: 1043018040)

40The Jewish leaders then shouted again, “No, do not release this man, but release Barabbas!” (Barabbas was a revolutionary.)


## John 19:1 (id: 1043019001)

1So at that time Pilate {ordered his soldiers to} take Jesus and beat him with whips.


## John 19:2 (id: 1043019002)

2The soldiers also took some branches with thorns on them and wound them together to make something like a crown. Then they put it on Jesus’ head and put a purple robe on him {in order to mock him}.


## John 19:3 (id: 1043019003)

3They kept approaching him and jeering at him, saying, “We salute you, King of the Jews!” and kept slapping his face.


## John 19:4 (id: 1043019004)

4Pilate came outside again and said to the Jewish leaders, “Look, I am about to bring him out to you in order that you can know that I have found no evidence that this man has broken a law.”


## John 19:5 (id: 1043019005)

5So Jesus came out. He was wearing the crown made of branches with thorns and the purple robe. Pilate said to the Jewish leaders, “Look, here is the man!”


## John 19:6 (id: 1043019006)

6When the ruling priests and temple guards saw Jesus, they shouted, “Crucify him! Crucify him!” Pilate told them, “You yourselves take him and crucify him! As for me, I have found no evidence that this man has broken a law.”


## John 19:7 (id: 1043019007)

7The Jewish leaders replied to Pilate, “We have a certain law that says he ought to die, because he claimed to be the Son of God.”


## John 19:8 (id: 1043019008)

8When Pilate heard that, he was more afraid {than before of what would happen to himself if he condemned Jesus to die}.


## John 19:9 (id: 1043019009)

9He entered his headquarters once more {and commanded the soldiers to bring Jesus back inside. Then} he asked Jesus, “Where did you come from?” However, Jesus did not answer his question.


## John 19:10 (id: 1043019010)

10So Pilate said to him, “You should answer me! You surely know that I have the power to release you, and I also have the power to crucify you!”


## John 19:11 (id: 1043019011)

11Jesus replied to him, “The only power you have over me is the power that God has given you. So the man who brought me to you has committed a worse sin than you are committing.”


## John 19:12 (id: 1043019012)

12From that moment on, Pilate kept trying to release Jesus. However, the Jewish leaders cried out, “If you release this man, you are not loyal to Caesar! Anyone who claims to be a king opposes Caesar.”


## John 19:13 (id: 1043019013)

13So when Pilate heard that, he {ordered his soldiers to} bring Jesus out. Then Pilate sat down {to pronounce a verdict} on the seat where he usually pronounced verdicts. This was at a place people called “The Stone Pavement,” which was “Gabbatha” in the language spoken by the Jews.


## John 19:14 (id: 1043019014)

14(It was {the day before the Passover celebration, which was} the day when the Jewish people prepared for the celebration. It was almost noon.) Pilate said to the Jewish leaders, “Look, here is your king!”


## John 19:15 (id: 1043019015)

15They shouted, “Kill him! Kill him! Crucify him!” Pilate {mocked} them by saying, “Should I {order my soldiers to} crucify your king?” The ruling priests replied, “Caesar is our only king!”


## John 19:16 (id: 1043019016)

16Then, because of what they said, Pilate ordered his soldiers to crucify Jesus. Then the soldiers took Jesus away {in order to crucify him}.


## John 19:17 (id: 1043019017)

17Jesus went out, carrying his cross by himself to the place that people called “The Place of a Skull,” which was “Golgotha” in the language spoken by the Jews.


## John 19:18 (id: 1043019018)

18The soldiers crucified him at that place. They also crucified two other men with him. One man was on either side of Jesus, so that Jesus was between them.


## John 19:19 (id: 1043019019)

19Pilate also {ordered someone} to write a notice on a board and fasten it to Jesus’ cross. {That person} wrote on it, ‘Jesus from Nazareth, the King of the Jews.’


## John 19:20 (id: 1043019020)

20Many Jewish people read this notice because the place where the soldiers crucified Jesus was close to the city of Jerusalem and {because} someone wrote the notice in three languages, which were the languages spoken by Jews, Romans, and Greeks.


## John 19:21 (id: 1043019021)

21The ruling Jewish priests returned to Pilate and said, “You should not have written on that notice, ‘The King of the Jews.’ Rather, {you should have written,} ‘This man said that he is the King of the Jews’.”


## John 19:22 (id: 1043019022)

22Pilate replied, “What I {ordered my soldiers} to write on the notice is what they have written. {I will not change it.}”


## John 19:23 (id: 1043019023)

23After the soldiers had put Jesus on the cross, they took his clothes and divided them into four equal parts, one part was for each soldier. {However, they kept his} tunic {separate}. The weaver had woven this tunic from top to bottom from one piece of cloth that did not have any seams.


## John 19:24 (id: 1043019024)

24So the soldiers said to each other, “Let us not tear this tunic. Instead, let us decide who will keep it by gambling {and giving it to the winner}.” That occurred in order to make this scripture come true: “They divided my clothes among them. They gambled for my clothing.” That is why the soldiers did those things.


## John 19:25 (id: 1043019025)

25Jesus’ mother, his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene were all standing near the cross that he was hanging on.


## John 19:26 (id: 1043019026)

26When Jesus saw his mother {standing there} and the disciple John whom Jesus loved standing near her, he told his mother, “Madam, here is the one who will take care of you like a son would.”


## John 19:27 (id: 1043019027)

27Next, he said to John, “Here is the one whom you will take care of like you would your own mother!” From that moment, John took her to live in his own home.


## John 19:28 (id: 1043019028)

28A little while later, because Jesus knew that he had already done everything that God had sent him to do, {and} in order to make another {prophecy in} scripture come true, he said, “I am thirsty!”


## John 19:29 (id: 1043019029)

29Someone had put a jar containing cheap wine there {and Jesus was thirsty}. So the soldiers took a reed from a hyssop plant and put a sponge on it. {Then they dipped the sponge} in the cheap wine and held it up to Jesus’ mouth.


## John 19:30 (id: 1043019030)

30So Jesus drank the cheap wine and then said, “I have completed {everything that I came here to do}!” And he bowed his head and voluntarily died.


## John 19:31 (id: 1043019031)

31The Jewish leaders then asked Pilate to {order his soldiers to} break the legs of the three men on crosses {so that the men would die more quickly} and take away their bodies in order that the bodies would not remain on the crosses during the Jewish day for rest. {They asked this} because it was the day when the Jewish people prepared for the Passover celebration {and the day for rest, and leaving dead bodies on crosses during those days violated Jewish law}. (Since the next day was also the day for rest, it was a very important day.)


## John 19:32 (id: 1043019032)

32So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first man, who had been crucified at the same time as Jesus. {Then they broke the legs} of the other man.


## John 19:33 (id: 1043019033)

33However, when they came to Jesus, they saw that he was dead already. So they did not break his legs.


## John 19:34 (id: 1043019034)

34Instead, one of the soldiers stabbed Jesus’ side with a spear, and right away blood and water poured out {of the wound}.


## John 19:35 (id: 1043019035)

35(I, John, am the one who saw this happen and have testified about it and what I have testified is true. I am certain that I am saying what is true; I say it in order that you may trust in Jesus as well.)


## John 19:36 (id: 1043019036)

36These things happened {to Jesus’ body} in order to make {this prophecy in} scripture come true: “No one will break any of his bones.”


## John 19:37 (id: 1043019037)

37{They} also {made} another {prophecy in} scripture {come true}. It states: “They will look at the man whom they have stabbed.”


## John 19:38 (id: 1043019038)

38After these things happened, Joseph, who was a man originally from the city of Arimathea, asked Pilate to allow him to take away Jesus’ body. {He did this} because he was one of Jesus’ disciples. However, he did not tell anyone that, because he was afraid of the other Jewish leaders. Pilate allowed Joseph to take away Jesus’ body, so Joseph went and did so.


## John 19:39 (id: 1043019039)

39Nicodemus also came. {He was the man} who had once come {and spoken} with Jesus at night. He brought a mixture of myrrh and aloe spices {to prepare Jesus’ body for burial}. Those spices weighed about 33 kilograms.


## John 19:40 (id: 1043019040)

40They took Jesus’ body and wrapped strips of linen cloth around it and put the {myrrh and aloe} spices {under the strips of cloth}. {They did this} according to the Jewish customs about burying bodies.


## John 19:41 (id: 1043019041)

41(There was a garden near the place where the soldiers had crucified Jesus. In the garden was a newly made burial cave. No one had yet buried anyone in that cave.)


## John 19:42 (id: 1043019042)

42So they put Jesus’ body in that tomb because it was nearby and because it was the day when the Jewish people prepared for the Passover celebration {so they had to bury the body before sundown}.


## John 20:1 (id: 1043020001)

1Early on Sunday morning, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene came to the tomb {where they had buried Jesus}. She saw that someone had moved the stone away from the entrance to the tomb.


## John 20:2 (id: 1043020002)

2So she ran to where Simon Peter and the other disciple, John, whom Jesus loved, {were staying}. She told them, “Some people have removed the Lord Jesus’ body from the tomb, and we do not know where they have put it!”


## John 20:3 (id: 1043020003)

3When they heard this, Peter and John left where they were staying and went to the tomb.


## John 20:4 (id: 1043020004)

4They were both running, but John ran faster than Peter and reached the tomb before him.


## John 20:5 (id: 1043020005)

5When John bent down {and looked into the tomb}, he saw the strips of linen cloth {that they had wrapped around Jesus’ body} lying where his body had lain, but he did not go into the tomb.


## John 20:6 (id: 1043020006)

6Simon Peter was running behind John. He arrived there as well and went inside the tomb. He also saw the strips of linen cloth lying where Jesus’ body had lain.


## John 20:7 (id: 1043020007)

7Peter also saw the cloth that someone had wrapped around Jesus’ head. {It was} not lying with the strips of linen cloth. Rather, someone had folded it and set it apart from them.


## John 20:8 (id: 1043020008)

8Then John, that other disciple who had reached the tomb before Peter, went inside as well. He saw these things and believed {that Jesus had become alive again}.


## John 20:9 (id: 1043020009)

9(At that time they did not understand what the prophets had written in those scriptures which said that Jesus had to die and become alive again.)


## John 20:10 (id: 1043020010)

10The disciples then returned to the places where they were staying {in Jerusalem}.


## John 20:11 (id: 1043020011)

11Mary Magdalene remained standing and crying outside of the tomb. While she was crying, she bent down {and looked} inside the tomb.


## John 20:12 (id: 1043020012)

12She saw two angels wearing white clothing. {They were} sitting on the place where people had laid Jesus’ body. One angel was sitting on the place where Jesus’ head had been. The other angel was sitting on the place where Jesus’ feet had been.


## John 20:13 (id: 1043020013)

13They asked her, “Madam, why are you crying?” She told them, “{I am crying} because some people have removed my Lord Jesus’ body {from this tomb}, and I do not know where they have put it!”


## John 20:14 (id: 1043020014)

14After she said that, she turned around and saw someone standing there. {It was Jesus,} but she did not recognize him.


## John 20:15 (id: 1043020015)

15He asked her, “Madam, why are you crying? Who are you looking for?” She thought that the man speaking to her was the gardener, so she told him, “Sir, if you have carried Jesus’ body away, tell me where you have put it. I will take it {and bury it again}.”


## John 20:16 (id: 1043020016)

16Jesus {called her by name,} saying, “Mary!” She turned {toward him again and} said to him, “Rabboni!” (which means “Teacher” in the language spoken by the Jews).


## John 20:17 (id: 1043020017)

17Jesus told her, “Stop clinging to me, because I have not yet returned to {heaven to be with} my Father. Go to the disciples, my brothers, and tell them that I am about to return to {heaven to be with} my God and Father, who is also your God and Father.”


## John 20:18 (id: 1043020018)

18Mary Magdalene went to Jesus’ disciples and told them, “I have seen the Lord Jesus!” {She} also told them what Jesus had told her.


## John 20:19 (id: 1043020019)

19On the evening of that same Sunday, the disciples had locked the doors of the place where they were staying, because they were afraid of the Jewish leaders. Jesus suddenly arrived and stood among them. He told them, “May God give you peace!”


## John 20:20 (id: 1043020020)

20After he said this, he showed his disciples the wounds that were in his hands and side. They were very happy when they saw the Lord Jesus!


## John 20:21 (id: 1043020021)

21Jesus then told them a second time, “May God give you peace! I am sending you {into the world} just like my Father sent me.”


## John 20:22 (id: 1043020022)

22After he said this, Jesus blew on them and said, “Accept the Holy Spirit.


## John 20:23 (id: 1043020023)

23If you forgive anyone’s sins, God will forgive that person for those sins. If you do not forgive someone’s sins, God will not forgive that person for those sins.”


## John 20:24 (id: 1043020024)

24Thomas, one of Jesus’ 12 representatives, whom they called ‘The Twin,’ was not there among his other disciples while Jesus was there among them.


## John 20:25 (id: 1043020025)

25The other disciples told Thomas, “We have seen the Lord Jesus!” However, he told them, “I will only believe you if I see the holes in his hands that were caused by nails and put my fingers in them and if I put my hand into the wound on his side {that was made by a spear}.”


## John 20:26 (id: 1043020026)

26Eight days later, Jesus’ disciples were again inside a house, and this time Thomas was with them. Although they had locked the doors, Jesus came and stood among them. He said to them, “May God give you peace!”


## John 20:27 (id: 1043020027)

27Then he said to Thomas, “Put your finger into the holes here, and see the holes in my hands, and put out your hand, and place it in the wound in my side! Stop doubting {that I became alive again}. Rather, believe {that it is true}!”


## John 20:28 (id: 1043020028)

28Thomas replied, “You are my Lord and my God!”


## John 20:29 (id: 1043020029)

29Jesus told him, “Now you believe {that I have become alive again} because you see me. God {surely} blesses those who have not seen me but yet believe {that I have become alive again}.”


## John 20:30 (id: 1043020030)

30Now Jesus also did many other miraculous signs while his disciples were with him, {but} I did not write about them in this book.


## John 20:31 (id: 1043020031)

31Nevertheless, I have written about the signs in this book in order that you may trust that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God. {I also wrote about these things} in order that, by trusting {that Jesus is the Messiah}, you may have eternal life through him.


## John 21:1 (id: 1043021001)

1After those things happened, Jesus appeared again to his disciples by the Sea of Tiberias, {which is also known as the Sea of Galilee}. This is how he appeared to them:


## John 21:2 (id: 1043021002)

2Simon Peter, Thomas (whom they called ‘The Twin’), Nathaniel (who was from Cana, which is a town in the region of Galilee), the sons of Zebedee (James and John), and two of Jesus’ other disciples were together.


## John 21:3 (id: 1043021003)

3Simon Peter told the other disciples with him, “I am going to catch some fish.” They told him, “We will go with you.” They went out and got into the boat {and fished}, but they did not catch any fish that night.


## John 21:4 (id: 1043021004)

4At dawn the next morning Jesus stood on the shore of the sea, but the disciples who were fishing did not know that it was him.


## John 21:5 (id: 1043021005)

5Jesus then called to them, “Dear friends, you do not have any fish, do you?” They replied, “We do not.”


## John 21:6 (id: 1043021006)

6He told them, “Throw your net off the right side of the boat and you will catch some fish.” So they did so, and they caught so many fish that they were not able to pull the net {into the boat}.


## John 21:7 (id: 1043021007)

7I, the disciple whom Jesus loved, then told Peter, “It is the Lord Jesus!” So when Simon Peter heard this, he put on his coat (he had taken it off to work) and jumped into the water {to swim to the shore}.


## John 21:8 (id: 1043021008)

8The rest of the disciples who had been fishing came to the shore in the boat, while pulling the net full of fish {behind the boat}. (They were not far from the shore, only 90 meters away.)


## John 21:9 (id: 1043021009)

9When they reached the shore, they saw a fire {that Jesus had prepared} and a fish he was cooking on it. {There was} also a loaf of bread.


## John 21:10 (id: 1043021010)

10Jesus told them, “Bring {over here} some of those fish that you have just caught!”


## John 21:11 (id: 1043021011)

11So Simon Peter went back {to the boat} and dragged the net to the shore. {It was} full of 153 large fish. Even though there were so many fish, the net did not tear.


## John 21:12 (id: 1043021012)

12Jesus told them, “Come {here and} eat breakfast!” None of the disciples were bold enough to ask him who he was. They knew it was the Lord Jesus.


## John 21:13 (id: 1043021013)

13Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them. He did the same with the fish.


## John 21:14 (id: 1043021014)

14(This was the third time that Jesus appeared to the disciples after God had caused him to become alive again.)


## John 21:15 (id: 1043021015)

15When they finished eating breakfast, Jesus asked Simon Peter, “Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these {others love me}?” Peter replied to him, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.” Jesus told him, “Take care of those who trust in me.”


## John 21:16 (id: 1043021016)

16Jesus asked him a second time, “Simon, son of John, do you love me?” He replied to him, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.” Jesus told him, “Take care of those who trust in me.”


## John 21:17 (id: 1043021017)

17Jesus asked him a third time, “Simon, son of John, do you love me?” Peter was sad because Jesus asked him three times if he loved him. Peter replied to him, “Lord, you know everything. You know that I love you.” Jesus told him, “Take care of those who trust in me.


## John 21:18 (id: 1043021018)

18I am telling you the truth: When you were young, you put your own clothes on, and you walked wherever you wanted to go. However, when you are old, you will extend your hands away from your body, and someone else will put clothes on you and take you where you do not want to go.”


## John 21:19 (id: 1043021019)

19(Jesus said this to indicate how Peter would die in order to show people how great God is). Then Jesus told him, “Come be my disciple!”


## John 21:20 (id: 1043021020)

20When Peter turned around, he saw John, the disciple whom Jesus loved, walking behind them. John was the one who had leaned close to Jesus during the dinner {before Jesus died} and asked, “Lord, who is going to betray you?”


## John 21:21 (id: 1043021021)

21So when Peter saw John, he asked Jesus, “Lord, what is going to happen to this man?”


## John 21:22 (id: 1043021022)

22Jesus said to him, “If I want him to continue living until I return, that is not your concern! As for you, {continue to} be my disciple!”


## John 21:23 (id: 1043021023)

23Because {Jesus said this}, the rumor that the disciple John was not going to die was repeated among the believers. However, Jesus did not tell Peter that John would not die. Rather, he said, “If I want him to continue living until I return, that is not your concern!”


## John 21:24 (id: 1043021024)

24I, John, am the disciple who is testifying about all these things, and I have written them down in this book. We know that what I have testified is true.


## John 21:25 (id: 1043021025)

25Jesus also did so many other things that if people wrote down every one of them, I suppose that the whole world would not even be big enough to contain the books that those people would write about them.


