# unfoldingWord Simplified

## License Information

**unfoldingWord Simplified** is based on and adapted from: _unfoldingWord® Simplified Text_, [unfoldingWord](https://unfoldingword.org/), 2022, which is licensed under a [CC BY-SA 4.0 license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode.en).

This markdown version is provided under the same license.



--------------------------------

## 2 Timothy 1:1 (id: 1055001001)

1{I,} Paul, {write this letter to you.} God chose to send me to represent Jesus the Messiah. So, I tell others that God has promised that people whom he has united to Jesus the Messiah will live {with God forever}.


## 2 Timothy 1:2 (id: 1055001002)

2{I send this letter} to you, Timothy. I love you as if you were my own son. {May} God the Father and Jesus the Messiah, our Lord, {continue to be} kind and merciful to you and {make you} peaceful.


## 2 Timothy 1:3 (id: 1055001003)

3I worship God just as my parents and grandparents did, and I know that I am doing what is right. I thank God when I pray for you, which I do very frequently.


## 2 Timothy 1:4 (id: 1055001004)

4I think about how you cried {when I left you}, and I desire to be with you again. Then I will rejoice greatly.


## 2 Timothy 1:5 (id: 1055001005)

5I also think about how you truly trust {in Jesus}. Your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice first trusted in him. I know that you also trust in him like they do!


## 2 Timothy 1:6 (id: 1055001006)

6Because you truly trust in {Jesus}, I urge you to continue eagerly to do what God has graciously enabled you to do. God enabled you to do that when I touched you {to authorize you}.


## 2 Timothy 1:7 (id: 1055001007)

7{You should eagerly do that} because God did not cause us to be afraid. Instead, he enabled us to serve him powerfully, to love others, and to control ourselves.


## 2 Timothy 1:8 (id: 1055001008)

8Because of that, do not think that telling people about our Lord {Jesus} disgraces you. Do not think that I, who am in jail because of him, disgrace you. Instead, you should be willing to let bad things happen to you, as they have happened to me, so that {you can proclaim} the good news. God will enable you {to endure those bad things}.


## 2 Timothy 1:9 (id: 1055001009)

9He is the one who rescued us and chose us to be people whom he sets apart for himself. He did not do those things because of what we had done. Rather, he did those things because he wanted to and because he decided to act kindly toward us. Before the world began, he prepared to act kindly toward us when he would unite us to the Messiah, Jesus.


## 2 Timothy 1:10 (id: 1055001010)

10Now is the time when we can experience how God acts kindly toward us. That happens because the Messiah Jesus, the one who rescues us, came {to this world}. He has made it insignificant when people die. He has given us the good news, which shows us how we can live {with God forever} and never die.


## 2 Timothy 1:11 (id: 1055001011)

11For the sake of that good news, God commissioned me to speak for him, to represent Jesus, and to instruct people.


## 2 Timothy 1:12 (id: 1055001012)

12Because {God commissioned me to do those things}, bad things are happening to me. However, I do not think that experiencing those bad things disgraces me. That is because I understand who God is. He is the one in whom I have trusted. I am sure that he will preserve what I have given to him until Jesus returns to this world.


## 2 Timothy 1:13 (id: 1055001013)

13You should maintain the basic parts of the right message that you learned from me. {As you do that,} you should trust in {Jesus} and love others. {You can do those things} because God unites you to the Messiah Jesus.


## 2 Timothy 1:14 (id: 1055001014)

14You should carefully preserve the true message that God has given to you. The Holy Spirit who empowers us will enable you {to do that}.


## 2 Timothy 1:15 (id: 1055001015)

15You realize that almost all the believers in {the province of} Asia {Minor} have left me, including Phygelus and Hermogenes.


## 2 Timothy 1:16 (id: 1055001016)

16{I pray that} the Lord {Jesus} will be kind to Onesiphorus and his family. {I pray that} since he often encouraged me. Further, even when people put me in jail, he did not think that I disgraced him.


## 2 Timothy 1:17 (id: 1055001017)

17In fact, when he came {here} to {the city of} Rome, he kept looking for me until he located me.


## 2 Timothy 1:18 (id: 1055001018)

18{So, I pray that} the Lord {Jesus} will be kind to Onesiphorus when the Lord Jesus returns to this world. Additionally, you realize how much Onesiphorus helped {me when we were} in {the city of} Ephesus.


## 2 Timothy 2:1 (id: 1055002001)

1As for you, {Timothy,} you are like my own son. Allow God to make you {spiritually} stronger as he acts kindly toward you. {He acts kindly toward you} because he has united you to Jesus the Messiah.


## 2 Timothy 2:2 (id: 1055002002)

2You have listened to the things that I teach, and many people have confirmed them to you. You must teach other people those same things. Those people must be trustworthy and good at teaching even more people.


## 2 Timothy 2:3 (id: 1055002003)

3You should be willing to let bad things happen to you, as they have happened to me, when you obey Jesus the Messiah. Then, you will be like a good soldier{, who obeys his commander even if bad things happen to him}.


## 2 Timothy 2:4 (id: 1055002004)

4{Consider this:} soldiers focus on doing what their commanders want. Because of that, they do not participate in what civilians normally do.


## 2 Timothy 2:5 (id: 1055002005)

5{Consider this} too: when an athlete disobeys the rules, the referee does not name that athlete the winner.


## 2 Timothy 2:6 (id: 1055002006)

6{Finally, consider this:} people who labor to grow crops should be the first people to receive some of what they grow.


## 2 Timothy 2:7 (id: 1055002007)

7Consider {the three examples} that I have just written to you. The Lord {Jesus} will enable you to learn completely what they mean.


## 2 Timothy 2:8 (id: 1055002008)

8Focus on Jesus the Messiah, whom God made alive again. He is a descendant of King David. That is the good news that I proclaim.


## 2 Timothy 2:9 (id: 1055002009)

9Because I proclaim that good news, bad things happen to me. In fact, I am now in jail, as if I had done something wrong. However, no one can prevent people from hearing the message from God.


## 2 Timothy 2:10 (id: 1055002010)

10Because that is true, for the sake of those whom God has chosen I always persevere {when bad things happen to me}. That way, God will rescue them, like me, by uniting them to the Messiah Jesus, and they will be glorious forever.


## 2 Timothy 2:11 (id: 1055002011)

11Everyone should trust this statement: “It is as if we died with Jesus when he died. So then, we will also live {forever} with him.


## 2 Timothy 2:12 (id: 1055002012)

12Suppose that we persevere {when bad things happen to us}. Then we will also rule {over everything} with him. Suppose that we say that we do not know him. Then he also will say that he does not know us.


## 2 Timothy 2:13 (id: 1055002013)

13Suppose that we stop being loyal {to Jesus}. Then he continues to be loyal {to us}. That is because he always acts based on who he is.”


## 2 Timothy 2:14 (id: 1055002014)

14Teach those things again {to the believers who are with you}. You should tell them to have God guarantee that they will not debate about what words mean. Debating like that does not help anybody. Further, it harms the people who listen to it.


## 2 Timothy 2:15 (id: 1055002015)

15Eagerly desire to be a person whom God considers to be acceptable to him. {To do that,} you should serve God by properly explaining the true message. Then, nothing can disgrace you.


## 2 Timothy 2:16 (id: 1055002016)

16Do not listen when people say things that mean nothing and that have nothing to do with God. Those people dishonor God more and more.


## 2 Timothy 2:17 (id: 1055002017)

17Further, what they say will spread as an infectious disease does. Hymenaeus and Philetus are examples of such people.


## 2 Timothy 2:18 (id: 1055002018)

18These two men have failed to believe and teach what is true. Instead, they claim that God has already made everyone alive again. In this way, they cause some people to stop trusting in {Jesus}.


## 2 Timothy 2:19 (id: 1055002019)

19Despite that, God preserves his people. They are like a building that has a solid foundation, which God has guaranteed with two statements. {Here is the first statement:} “The Lord {Jesus} realizes which people belong to him.” {Here is the second statement:} “Everyone who claims to serve the Lord {Jesus} must stop doing what is wrong.”


## 2 Timothy 2:20 (id: 1055002020)

20Consider this example: a wealthy person’s house contains utensils that someone made out of {valuable materials like} gold and silver. {Such a house} also contains utensils that someone made out of {less valuable materials like} wood and clay. People use the valuable utensils to perform dignified tasks. In contrast, they use the less valuable utensils to perform undignified tasks.


## 2 Timothy 2:21 (id: 1055002021)

21So then, suppose that some people avoid doing what is evil. Those people will be like the utensils that people use to perform dignified tasks. God will set them apart for himself. They will serve God well. God will enable them to do everything that is right.


## 2 Timothy 2:22 (id: 1055002022)

22You must avoid desiring the wrong things that young people usually desire. Instead, you should always try to do what is right. You should trust in {Jesus}. You should love {others}. You should live peacefully {with others.} {You should do those things} along with people who desire what is good and who worship the Lord {Jesus}.


## 2 Timothy 2:23 (id: 1055002023)

23Refuse to discuss controversial issues that uninformed and unwise people care about. You realize that discussing those issues makes people quarrel with each other.


## 2 Timothy 2:24 (id: 1055002024)

24People who serve the Lord {Jesus} must not quarrel. Instead, they must be kind to all people. They must be good at teaching others. They must endure when bad things happen to them.


## 2 Timothy 2:25 (id: 1055002025)

25They should gently instruct the people who argue against them. Then God may enable those people to stop believing what is wrong and instead understand what is true.


## 2 Timothy 2:26 (id: 1055002026)

26Previously, Satan was able to control them so that they did what he wanted. {However, after you instruct them,} Satan may no longer be able to control them, and they may be able to think clearly again.


## 2 Timothy 3:1 (id: 1055003001)

1You need to understand that the final time period {before Jesus returns to this world} will be very dangerous {for believers}.


## 2 Timothy 3:2 (id: 1055003002)

2{It will be dangerous} because people will care about themselves {more than they care about anyone else}. They will strongly desire to have money. They will say great things about themselves. They will think too highly of themselves. They will insult {God and others}. They will fail to do what their parents require. They will not thank {anyone for anything}. They will not honor God.


## 2 Timothy 3:3 (id: 1055003003)

3They will fail to care {for others}. They will refuse to forgive {anyone}. They will say bad things {about others}. They will fail to control themselves. They will act in brutal ways. They will hate everything that is good.


## 2 Timothy 3:4 (id: 1055003004)

4They will betray {others}. They will act without thinking first. They will be prideful. They will care about whatever makes them feel good instead of loving God.


## 2 Timothy 3:5 (id: 1055003005)

5They will appear to honor God, but they will refuse to actually do so. Stay away from such people.


## 2 Timothy 3:6 (id: 1055003006)

6Further, some of those people convince others to invite them to their homes. {While they are there}, they start to control what any spiritually immature women {who live there} think. These are women who have sinned very often. They do all the many things that they want to do.


## 2 Timothy 3:7 (id: 1055003007)

7They keep learning new things, but they can never understand what is true.


## 2 Timothy 3:8 (id: 1055003008)

8{You know} how Jannes and Jambres{, Pharaoh’s magicians,} tried to stop Moses {from freeing the Israelites}. Much like that, the {false teachers I am speaking about} try to stop others from learning what is true. These false teachers are people who can no longer think properly. When they claim to believe in {Jesus}, God does not approve of them.


## 2 Timothy 3:9 (id: 1055003009)

9However, they will not be able to convince many more people. {That is} because everyone will realize that they are foolish. That is just what happened to Pharaoh’s magicians.


## 2 Timothy 3:10 (id: 1055003010)

10In contrast, as for you, you know what I do, and you imitate me. I teach {others}. I live {to please God}. I focus on what {God has called me} to do. I trust in {Jesus}. I do not easily become angry. I love {others}. I persevere {when bad things happen to me}.


## 2 Timothy 3:11 (id: 1055003011)

11People hurt me. I experience painful things. I experienced those kinds of painful things when I was in {the cities of} Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra. Even when people hurt me in those ways, I persisted {in serving God}. When any of those bad things happened to me, the Lord {Jesus} delivered me.


## 2 Timothy 3:12 (id: 1055003012)

12Indeed, people will hurt all men and women who desire to live in a way that honors God as God unites them to the Messiah, Jesus.


## 2 Timothy 3:13 (id: 1055003013)

13On the other hand, people who do what is wrong and people who try to trick others will become more and more evil. They will deceive others, and people will deceive them.


## 2 Timothy 3:14 (id: 1055003014)

14In contrast, as for you, you realize who taught you what you have learned and what you are sure about. So, you should persist in {believing} those things.


## 2 Timothy 3:15 (id: 1055003015)

15Further, {you should persist in believing those things because you realize} that you have heard what God says in the Scriptures from the time when you were a young child. The Scriptures enable you to think wisely. That way, when you trust in the Messiah, Jesus, God rescues you.


## 2 Timothy 3:16 (id: 1055003016)

16All the Scriptures come from God’s Spirit. They are useful for teaching people. {They are useful} for telling people that they have done what is wrong. {They are useful} for telling people what is actually true. {They are useful} for instructing people in how to do what is right.


## 2 Timothy 3:17 (id: 1055003017)

17As a result, people who serve God have everything that they need. They are ready to do everything that is right.


## 2 Timothy 4:1 (id: 1055004001)

1God and Jesus the Messiah are listening right now {and agreeing with me} as I command you {to do what I am about to tell you}. {Remember that} Jesus will soon decide whether everyone who is alive and everyone who has died is guilty or innocent. {You should focus on what I am about to command you} as much as you expect Jesus to return {to this world} and to rule over everything.


## 2 Timothy 4:2 (id: 1055004002)

2{Here is what I want you to do}: you must proclaim the good news. Be ready to do that when it is a good time to do so and also when it is not a good time to do so. When people have done what is wrong, confront them. Warn them {not to sin}. Encourage them {to do what is right}. {As you do all those things,} never become angry quickly, and always instruct people.


## 2 Timothy 4:3 (id: 1055004003)

3{I tell you to do those things} because later on people will refuse to listen when others teach them what is right. Rather, they will do what they want by collecting many instructors. They will be eager to listen to what pleases them.


## 2 Timothy 4:4 (id: 1055004004)

4They will stop listening to what is true. Instead, they will focus on legends.


## 2 Timothy 4:5 (id: 1055004005)

5In contrast, as for you, you must control yourself at all times. You must {be willing to} allow bad things happen to you. You must do what you have to do in order to proclaim the good news. You must complete everything you must do to serve {Jesus}.


## 2 Timothy 4:6 (id: 1055004006)

6{I tell you to do those things} because I will soon die. God is even now treating me as if I were wine that someone was pouring out to honor him.


## 2 Timothy 4:7 (id: 1055004007)

7I am like a soldier who has battled his enemies. I am like a runner who has finished his race. {I mean that} I have persisted in trusting in {Jesus}.


## 2 Timothy 4:8 (id: 1055004008)

8I can now expect the reward for doing what is right, which God has ready for me. The Lord {Jesus}, who always evaluates people justly, will give me that reward when he returns {to this world}. However, I will not be the only one whom he rewards. Rather, he will reward everyone who rejoices when he returns {to this world}.


## 2 Timothy 4:9 (id: 1055004009)

9Please try to visit me {here} soon.


## 2 Timothy 4:10 (id: 1055004010)

10{I ask you to do that} because Demas has abandoned me since he cares {too much} about living in this present world. He has left for {the city of} Thessalonica. Crescens {has left} for {the province of} Galatia. Titus {has left} for {the province of} Dalmatia.


## 2 Timothy 4:11 (id: 1055004011)

11Luke is the only one who is still {here} with me. When you visit, bring Mark with you. {I ask for him} because he serves {others} with me well.


## 2 Timothy 4:12 (id: 1055004012)

12As for Tychicus, I told him to go to {the city of} Ephesus.


## 2 Timothy 4:13 (id: 1055004013)

13I left an outer garment with Carpus in {the city of} Troas. Please bring it with you when you visit me. Also{, please bring with you} my books, particularly the ones with leather pages.


## 2 Timothy 4:14 (id: 1055004014)

14Alexander, who makes things out of metal, did many bad things to me. The Lord {Jesus} will punish him for what he has done.


## 2 Timothy 4:15 (id: 1055004015)

15He tried very hard to keep us from proclaiming the good news. So, you too need to watch out for him.


## 2 Timothy 4:16 (id: 1055004016)

16The first time I defended myself {in court}, no believers came to support me. Instead, they all abandoned me. I pray that God will forgive them for that.


## 2 Timothy 4:17 (id: 1055004017)

17However, the Lord {Jesus} supported me and made me strong. That way, I could complete proclaiming {the good news}, and many non\-Jews could listen to it. Also, God delivered me from people who would have killed me.


## 2 Timothy 4:18 (id: 1055004018)

18{I am sure that} the Lord {Jesus} will deliver me whenever people do anything bad to me. He will rescue me so that I can participate in his kingdom, which is in heaven. Let us honor him forever! May it be so!


## 2 Timothy 4:19 (id: 1055004019)

19Say hello for me to Prisca, Aquila, and Onesiphorus and his family.


## 2 Timothy 4:20 (id: 1055004020)

20Erastus stayed in {the city of} Corinth. As for Trophimus, he stayed behind in {the city of} Miletus because he was ill.


## 2 Timothy 4:21 (id: 1055004021)

21Please try to visit {me here} before the winter season. Eubulus, Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and {the rest of} the fellow believers {here} say hello to you.


## 2 Timothy 4:22 (id: 1055004022)

22{I pray that} the Lord {Jesus} will be with you{, Timothy}. {I pray that God will} be kind to you all.


