# unfoldingWord Simplified

## License Information

**unfoldingWord Simplified** is based on and adapted from: _unfoldingWord® Simplified Text_, [unfoldingWord](https://unfoldingword.org/), 2022, which is licensed under a [CC BY-SA 4.0 license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode.en).

This markdown version is provided under the same license.



--------------------------------

## 3 John 1:1 (id: 1064001001)

1{From John} the Church Leader. To Gaius, my dear friend, whom I truly love.


## 3 John 1:2 (id: 1064001002)

2Dear friend, I am asking God to make everything go well for you and to keep you healthy physically, just as you are healthy in respect to God.


## 3 John 1:3 (id: 1064001003)

3I know that you are healthy in respect to God because some fellow believers came here and told me about your truthful way of living. They said that you live according to the true message about Jesus. That makes me very happy.


## 3 John 1:4 (id: 1064001004)

4This is what makes me the very happiest—when someone tells me that the people whom I have helped to follow Jesus are living according to the true message from God!


## 3 John 1:5 (id: 1064001005)

5Dear friend, you are serving Jesus loyally whenever you do things to help fellow believers, even those whom you do not know.


## 3 John 1:6 (id: 1064001006)

6(6\-7\) Some of them have reported before the congregation here how you have shown that you love them. Because such people are traveling in order to be obedient to Jesus, you are doing the right thing when you help them. As God’s servants, they deserve your help. They have decided to accept support only from fellow believers,


## 3 John 1:8 (id: 1064001008)

8and so all of us {who believe in Jesus} should give these people whatever they need. Then it will be as though we are working alongside them as they help others to know God’s true message.


## 3 John 1:9 (id: 1064001009)

9I wrote a letter to your group of believers to tell them to help those other believers. However, Diotrephes, who wants to dominate your group, refuses to do this.


## 3 John 1:10 (id: 1064001010)

10So when I arrive there I will publicly tell everyone what he does: He says bad things about us that are not true. In addition to doing that, he also refuses to welcome the believers {who are traveling in order to do God’s work}. He even prevents those who do want to welcome them and forces them to leave the group of believers!


## 3 John 1:11 (id: 1064001011)

11Dear friend, do not copy a bad example {like that}. Instead, do the good things that you see good people doing. {Remember that} people who do good deeds truly belong to God. But anyone who keeps doing what is bad does not know God.


## 3 John 1:12 (id: 1064001012)

12People widely praise Demetrius as a good person. It is also clear from the way he lives according to God’s true message that he is a good person. We also confirm that he is a good person, and you know that what we say is true.


## 3 John 1:13 (id: 1064001013)

13There are many {more} things about which I could write to you. But I do not want to write to you {about them} in a letter.


## 3 John 1:14 (id: 1064001014)

14Instead, I hope to come and see you soon. Then we will talk directly with one another.


## 3 John 1:15 (id: 1064001015)

15I pray that God will help you live peacefully. The believers {here} greet you. Please greet for us {each of} the believers {there} individually.


